Okay. Neil, we can see you coming down the ladder now.

Okay. I just checked getting back up to that first step, Buzz. It's - not even collapsed too far, but it's adequate to get back up.



Roger. We copy.

It takes a pretty good little jump.

Oh 13 23 25        Buzz, this is Houston. F/2 - 1/160th second for shadow photography on the sequence camera.

Okay.

I'm at the foot of the ladder. The LM footpads are only depressed in the surface about 1 or 2 inches, although the surface appears to be very, very fine grained, as you get close to it. It's almost like a powder. Down there, it's very fine.

I'm going to step off the LM now.

THAT'S ONE SMALL STEP FOR MAN, ONE GIANT LEAP FOR MANKIND.

And the - the surface is fine and powdery. I can - I can pick it up loosely with my toe. It does adhere in fine layers like powdered charcoal to the sole and sides of my boots. I only go in a small fraction of an inch, maybe an eighth of an inch, but I can see the footprints of my boots and the treads in the fine, sandy particles.

Neil, this is Houston. We're copying.

There seems to be no difficulty in moving around as we suspected. It's even perhaps easier than the simulations at one sixth g that we performed in the various simulations on the ground. It's actually no trouble to walk around. Okay. The descent engine did not leave a crater of any size. It has about 1 foot clearance on the ground. We're essentially on a very level place here. I can see some evidence of rays emanating from the descent engine, but a very insignificant amount.

Okay, Buzz, we ready to bring down the camera?

I'm all ready. I think it's been all squared away and in good shape.

Okay.



Okay. You'll have to pay out all the LEC. It looks like it's coming out nice and evenly.

Okay. It's quite dark here in the shadow and a little hard for me to see that I have good footing. I'll work my way over into the sunlight here without looking directly into the Sun.

Okay. It's taut now.

Okay. I think you're pulling the wrong one.

I'm just - Okay. I'm ready to pull it down now. There was still a little bit left in the -

Okay. Don't hold it quite so tight.

Okay.

Looking up at the LM, I'm standing directly in tne shadow now looking up at Buzz in the window. And I can see everything quite clearly. The light is sufficiently bright backlighted into the front of the LM, that everything is very clearly visible,

Okay. I'm going to be changing the ***

Okay.

The camera is installed on the RCU bracket, and I'm storing the LEC on the secondary strut.

I'll step out and take some of my first pictures here.

Roger. Neil, we're reading you loud and clear. We see you getting some pictures and the contingency sample.

Neil, this is Houston. Did you copy about the contingency sample? Over.

Roger. I'm going to get to that just as soon as I finish these picture series.

Okay. Going to get the contingency sample there, Neil.

Right.

Okay. That's good.

Okay. The contingency sample is down and it's ***. Looks like it's a little difficult to dig through the initial crust.

This is very interesting. It's a very soft surface, but here and there where I plug with the contingency sample collector, I run into a very hard surface, but it appears to be very cohesive material of the same sort. I'll try to get a rock in here. Just a couple.

That looks beautiful from here, Neil.

It has a stark beauty all its own. It's like much of the high desert of the United States. It's different but it's very pretty out here. Be advised that a lot of the rock samples out here, the hard rock samples, have what appear to be vesicles in the surface. Also, I am looking at one now that appears to have some sort of phenocryst.

Houston. Roger. Out.

Okay. The handle is off the *** in about 6 or 8 inches into the surface. I could *** easy ***.

Yes, it is. it's - I'm sure I could push it in farther, but it's hard for me to bend down further than that.

Now, you can throw so far.

You can really throw things a long way up here.

That pocket open, Buzz?

Yes, it is. It's not up against your suit though. Hit it back once more. More toward the inside. Okay. That's good.

That in the pocket?

Yes. Push down.

Got it?

No. It's not all the way in. Push it. There you go.

Contingency sample is in the pocket. My oxygen is 81 percent. I have no flags, and I'm in minimum flow.

This is Houston. Roger, Neil.

Okay. I have got the cameras on at one frame a second.

Okay.

And I've got the 80 percent, no flags.

Are you getting a TV picture now, Houston?

Neil, yes we are getting a TV picture.

Neil, this is Houston. We're getting a picture. You're not in it at the present time. We can see the bag on the LEC being moved by Buzz, though. Here you come into our field of view.

Roger.

Hold it a second. First let me move that over the edge for you.

Okay. Are you ready for me to come out?

Yes. Just stand by a second. I'll move this over the handrail.

Okay.

All right. That's got it. Are you ready?

All set. Okay. You saw what difficulties I was having. I'll try to watch your PLSS from underneath here.

All right. The backup camera's positioned.

Okay. Your PLSS is - Looks like it is clearing okay. Your toes are about to come over the sill. Okay. Now drop your PLSS down. There you go; you're clear. And laterally you're good. You've got an inch clearance on top of your PLSS.

Okay. You need a little bit of arching of the back to come down. ... How are are my feet from the edge?

Okay. You're right at the edge of the porch.

Okay. Back in *** little of foot movement *** porch. Little arching of the back. Helmet comes up and clears the bulkhead without any trouble at all.

Looks good.

Neil, this is Houston. Based on your camera transfer with the LEC, do you foresee any difficulties in SRC transfer? Over.

Negative.

Okay. Now I want to back up and partially close the hatch.

Making sure not to lock it on my way out.

(Laughter) A pretty good thought.

That's our home for the next couple of hours and we want to take good care of it. Okay. I'm on the top step and I can look down over the RCU, landing gear pads. It's a very simple matter to hop down from one step to the next.

Yes. I found I could be very comfortable, and walking is also very comfortable.

You've got three more steps and then a long one.

Okay. I'm going to leave that one foot up there and both hands down to about the fourth rung up.

There you go.

Okay. Now I think I'll do the same ***

A little more. About another inch.

THERE YOU GOT IT.

That's a good step. About a 3-footer.

Beautiful view!

Isn't that something! Magnificent sight out here.

Magnificent desolation.

Looks like the secondary strut *** little thermal effects on it right here, Neil.

Yes. I noticed that. That seems to be the worst, although similar effects are on - all around.

BEGIN LUNAR REV 18

MS
... powder, isn't it?

Isn't it fine?

Right in this area I don't think there's much of any *** fine powder *** clods together, and it's hard to tell whether it's a clod or a rock.

Notice how you can kick it out.

Yes. And it bounces and then -

Reaching down is fairly easy. I got my suit dirty at this stage.

The mass of the backpack does have some effect in inertia.

There's a slight tendency, I can see now, to *** backwards *** due to the soft, very soft texture.

You're standing on a rock, a big rock there now.

This pad sure didn't ***

No. It didn't.

There's absolutely no crater there at all from the engine.

No.

I wonder if about right under the engine is where the probe might have hit.

I'd like that.

Yes. I think that's a good representation of our sideward velocity at touchdown there - hole at the probe.

I see that probe over on the minus-Y strut. It's broken off and bent back up.

It did, didn't it? The other two both bent over.

Can't say too much for the visibility right here without the visor up. It's dark. It looks like there is a *** surface of it is *** pounded rock *** And incidentally, these rocks *** very powdery surface ***

Say again, please, Buzz; you're cutting out.

I say that the rocks are rather slippery.

Roger.

A powdery surface when the sun hits. *** they split up all the very little fine porouses *** Will tend to slide over it rather easily.

Traction *** seems quite good. ***

*** About to lose my balance in one direction and recovery is a quite natural and very easy *** And, moving your arms around, Jack, doesn't *** off the surface *** not quite that light-footed.

And, I have the insulation off the MESA now and MESA seems to be in good shape.

Got to be careful that you are leaning in the direction you want to go, otherwise you *** slightly inebriated. In other words, you have to cross your foot over to stay underneath where your center-of-mass is.

And, Neil, didn't I say we might see some purple rocks?

Find a purple rock?

Yes. They are small, sparkly *** fragments *** places *** would make a first guess that some sort of biotite *** We'll leave that to further analysis ***

*** compact underneath *** completely no *** you don't sink down more than ... a quarter of an inch.

Okay, Houston. I'm going to change lenses on you.

Roger, Neil.

Okay, Houston. Tell me if you're getting a new picture.

Neil, this is Houston. That's affirmative. We're getting a new picture. You can tell it's a longer focal length lens. And for your information, all LM systems are GO. Over.

We appreciate that. Thank you.

Neil is now unveiling the plaque *** gear.

Roger. We got you boresighted, but back under one track.

For those who haven't read the plaque, we'll read the plaque that's on the front landing gear of this LM. First there's two hemispheres, one showing each of the two hemispheres of the Earth. Underneath it says "Here Man from the planet Earth first set foot upon the Moon, July 1969 A.D. We came in peace for all mankind." It has the crew members' signatures and the signature of the President of the United States.

Ready for the camera?

No. I'll get it. No, you take this TV on out.

Watch the LEC, there.

Now I'm afreid these ... materials are going to get dusty ***

The surface material is powdery. *** How good your lens is, but if you can *** smudges ... very much like a very finely powdered carbon, but it's very pretty looking.

Would you pull out some of my cable for me, Buzz?

Houston. How close are you able to get things in focus ?

This is Houston. We can see Buzz's right hand. It is somewhat out of focus. I'd say we were focusing down to probably - oh, about 8 inches to a foot behind the position of his hand when he was pulling out the cable.

Okay. How's the temperature on there?

Temperature of the camera is showing zero.

I'm a little cool. I think I'll trade ***

I'm on intermediate now, Houston, and I show 3.78. No flags, 70 ***

Houston. Roger. Out.

And, we'll probably need a little *** distance *** back location *** television camera.

Neil, look at the minus Y-strut, the direction of travel there *** travel from right to left.

Right.

This one over here underneath the ascent engine where the probe first hit - the minus-Y probe first hit.

I got plenty of cable?

You've got plenty. Plenty more.

Okay. I think I've got the end of it.

Something interesting: in the bottom of this little crater here - It may be -

Now keep going. We've got a lot more.

Okay.

Getting a little harder to pull out, here.

How far would you say I am, Buzz?

Forty, 50 feet. Why don't you turn around and let them get a view from there and see what the field of view looks like?

Okay.

You're backing into the cable.

Okay.

Turn around to your right, would be better.

I don't want to go into the Sun if I can avoid it.

That's right. Yes.

I'll just leave it

All right.

sit like that and walk around it.

Houston. How's that field of view going to pick up the MESA? *** far away?

Roger.

Neil, this is Houston. The field of view is okay. We'd like you to aim it a little bit more to the right. Over.

Okay.

Okay. That's all the cable we have. *** not going out. I'll start working on the solar wind

A little bit too much to the right. Can you bring it back left about 4 or 5 Degrees?

Okay. That looks good Neil.

Okay, now. Do you think I ought to be farther away, or closer?

Can't get too much further away.

Let's try it like that for a while. I'll get a couple of panoramas with it, here.

Roger. You look okay as far as distance goes, Neil. And we'll line you up again when you finish the panorama. Now you're going too fast on the panorama sweep. You're going to have to stop, or -

I haven't stopped - I haven't set it down yet. That's the first picture in the panorama. Right there.

Roger.

It's taken just a little - about north, north east.

Tell me if you've got a picture, Houston.

We've got a beautiful picture, Neil.

Okay. I'm going to move it.

Okay. Here's another good one.

Okay, we got that one.

Okay. Now, this one is right down front, straight west. And I want to know if you can see an angular rock in the foreground.

Roger. We have a large angular rock in the foreground, and it looks like a much smaller rock a couple of inches to the left of it. Over.

All right. And then on beyond it about 10 feet is an even larger rock that's very rounded. That rock is about - The closest one to you is about sticking out of the sand about 1 foot. And it's about a foot and one half long, and it's about 6 inches thick, but it's standing on edge.

Roger.

Okay, Neil. I've got the table out and the bag deployed.

We've got this view, Neil.

This is straight south.

Roger. And we see the shadow of the LM.

Roger. The little hill just beyond the shadow of the LM is a pair of elongate craters about - probably the pair together is about 40 feet long and 20 feet across, and they're probably 6 feet deep. We'll probably get some more work in there later.

Roger. We see Buzz going about his work.

How's that for a final?

For a final orientation, we'd like it to come left about 5 degrees. Over.

Now back to the right about half as much.

Okay?

Okay. That looks good there, Neil.



Okay.

Okay. You can make a Mark, Houston. *** deployed.

Roger. Solar wind.

And, incidently, you can use the shadow that the staff makes to *** getting it perpendicular ***

Roger.

Some of these small depressions *** tend to sink - oh, maybe 2 or 3 inches. *** suggest exactly what the Surveyor pictures showed when they pushed away a little bit. You get a force transmitted through the upper surface of the soil and about 5 or 6 inches of bay breaks loose and moves as if it were caked on the surface, when in fact it really isn't.

I noticed in the soft spots where we had footprints nearly an inch deep that the soil is very cohesive and it will retain a - will retain a slope of probably 70 degrees along side of the footprints.

Okay?

Yes. I think that's excellent.

They didn't come off?

*** get the ***

*** that part? *** a rock here.

You'll have to extend that one.

Columbia, Columbia, this is Houston. Over.

***

Houston, Columbia on the high gain. Over.

Columbia, this is Houston. Reading you loud and clear. Over.

Yes. Reading you loud and clear. How's it going?

Roger. The EVA is progressing beautifully. I believe they are setting up the flag now.

Great.

I guess you're about the only person around that doesn't have TV coverage of the scene.

04 14 09 25 That's all right. I don't mind a bit.

How is the quality of the TV?

Oh, it's beautiful, Mike. It really is.

Oh, gee, that's great! Is the lighting half way decent?

Yes, indeed. They've got the flag up now and you can see the stars and stripes on the lunar surface.

Beautiful. Just beautiful.

That's good. See if you can pull that end off a little bit. Take that end up a little.

It won't pull out.

Okay.

Neil, this is Houston. Radio check. Over.

Roger, Houston. Loud and clear.

Roger. Out.

Loud and clear, Houston.

Roger, Buzz.

I'd like to evaluate the various paces that a person can *** traveling on the lunar surface. I believe I'm out of your field of view. Is that right, now, Houston?

That's affirmative, Buzz.

You are in our field of view now.

Okay. You do have to be rather careful to keep track of where your center of mass is. Sometimes, it takes about two or three paces to make sure you've got your feet underneath you.

About two to three or maybe four easy paces can bring you to a nearly smooth stop. *** change directions, like a football player, you just have to to *** foot out to the side and cut a little bit.

So called kangeroo hop does work, but it seems that your forward mobility is not quite as good as - it is in the conventional - more conventional one foot after another.

It's hard saying what a sane pace might be. I think it's the one that I'm using now - would get rather tiring after several hundred *** but this may be a function of this suit, as well as lack of gravity forces.

Tranquility Base, this is Houston. Could we get both of you on the camera for a minute, please?

Say again, Houston.

Roger. We'd like to get both of you in the field of view of the camera for a minute.

Neil and Buzz, the President of the United States is in his office now and would like to say a few words to you. Over.

That would be an honor.

Go ahead, Mr. President. This is Houston. Out.

THE FOLLOWING IS A MESSAGE FROM RICHARD M. NIXON, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES; THE MESSAGE ORIGINATED FROM THE OVAL ROOM OF THE WHITE HOUSE, WASHINGTON, DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA

PRESIDENT NIXON
Neil and Buzz, I am talking to you by telephone from the Oval Room at the White House, and this certainly has to be the most historic telephone
call ever made. I just can't tell you how proud we all are of what you *** for every American. This has to be the proudest day of our lives. And for people all over the world, I am sure they, too, join with Americans in recognizing what an immense feat this is. Because of what you have done, the heavens have become a part of man's world. And as you talk to us from the Sea of Tranquility, it inspires us to redouble our efforts to bring peace and tranquility to Earth. For one priceless moment in the whole history of man, all the people on this Earth are truly one; one in their pride in what you have done, and one in our prayers that you will return safely to Earth.

Thank you, Mr. President. It's a great honor and privilege for us to be here representing not only the United States but men of peace of all nations, and with interest and a curiosity and a vision for the future. It's an honor for us to be able to participate here today.

PRESIDENT NIX0N
And thank you very much and I look forward - All of us look forward to seeing you on the Hornet on Thursday.

I look forward to that very much, sir.

Columbia, Columbia, this is Houston. Over.

Loud and clear, Houston.

Roger. I got a P22 AUTO optics - AUTO optics PAD for you.

Roger. Go ahead.

Roger. P22 landmark ID, LM: T1, 110 26 56; T2, 110 32 06. Three miles south; time of closest approach, 110 33 40. Shaft 353.855, trunnion 46.495, roll zero, pitch 250, yaw zero. Over.

Roger. Thank you. Readback not required.

Roger. Out.

Houston, it's very interesting to note that when I kick my foot *** with no atmosphere here, and this gravity *** they seem to leave, and most of them have about the same angle of departure and velocity. From where I stand, a large portion of them will impact at a certain distance out. Several *** the percentage is, of course, that will impact *** different regions *** it's highly dependent upon *** the initial trajectory upward *** where most of the *** already the particles are found, ... terrain.

Roger, Buzz. And break. Break. Columbia, this is Houston. When you track out of high gain antenna, then let's request OMNI Delta, OMNI Delta. Over.

So be it.

I've noticed several times in going from the sunlight into the shadow, that just as I go in, I catch an additional reflection off the LM *** along with the reflection off my face onto the visor, makes visibility very poor just at the transition *** sunlight into the shadow. I essentially have so much glare coming onto my visor *** shadow *** helmet actually gets the shadow. Than it takes a short while for my eyes to adapt to the lighting conditions. *** inside the shadow area, visibility, as we said before, is not too great, but both visor's up *** what sort of footprints we have and the general condition of the soil. Then, after being out in the sunlight a while, it takes - Watch it, Neil! Neil, you're on the cable.

Okay.

Yes. Lift up your right foot, right foot. It's still - your toe is still hooked in it.

That one?

Yes. It's still hooked in it. Wait a minute. Okay. You're clear now.

Thank you.

Now, let's move that over this way.

Okay. I've got it.

The blue color of my boots has completely disappeared now into this *** still don't know exactly what color to describe this other than ash cocoa color. It seems to be covering most of the lighter part of the boot *** color that *** very fine particles ***.

Buzz, this is Houston. You're cutting out on the end of your transmissions. Can you speak a little more closely into your microphone? Over.

Roger. I'll try that.

Beautiful.

Well, I had that one inside my mouth that time.

It sounded a little wet.

In general, time spent in the shadow doesn't seem to have any *** thermal effects. *** inside the suit. There is a difference, of course, in the ... radiation and the helmet. So I think there's a tendency to feel a little cooler in the shadow than the Sun.

Columbia, this is Houston. Over.

Columbia, this is Houston. Over.

Columbia, this is Houston. Over.

Houston, Columbia in Delta.

Roger. You should have VHF AOS with the LM right about now. VHF LOS will be about 40 minutes 15 seconds. Over.

Thank you.

As I look around the area, the contrast, in general, is *** comes about completely by virtue of the shadow *** down Sun ... very light colored gray, light gray color, a halo around my own shadow, around the shadow of my helmet. Then, as I look off across *** the contrast becomes strongest in that the surrounding color is still fairly light. As you look down into the Sun *** a larger amount of *** shadowed area is looking toward us. The general color of the *** surrounding *** the contrast is not as great. Surveying all the dusty area that we've kicked up *** considerably darker in texture. Now, I've kicked up one, and I imagine that this is *** Surveyor. The same is true when I survey across on - along the area that we're walking. In general *** to the fact that there are footprints there. General terrain where I've been kicking up a lot of this surface material is generally of a darker contrast *** color.

The panorama I'll be taking is about 30 or 40 feet out to plus ***

Say again which strut, Buzz?

The plus Z strut.

Roger.

And right in this area, there are two craters. The one that's right in front of me now as I look off in about the eleven o'clock position from the spacecraft, about 30 to 35 feet ... There's several eral rocks and boulders 6 to 8 inches across ... sizes.

I'm now in the area of the minus Y strut taking some ... photographs.

How's the bulk sample coming, Neil?

Bulk sample is just being sealed.

Houston, Columbia.

Columbia, this is Houston. Go ahead. Over.

Roger. No marks on the LM that time. I did see a suspiciously small white object whose coordinates are

Go ahead with the coordinates on the small white object.

Easy - Easy 0.3, 7.6, but I ... right on the southwest end of a crater. I think they would know it if they were in such a location. It looks like their LM would be pitched up quite a degree. It's on the southwest wall of a smallish crater.

Roger. Copy Echo 0.3 and 7.6, and -

Columbia, this is Houston. While I'm talking to you, LOS will be at 111 19 31; AOS, 112 05 43. Over.

Columbia, this is Houston. Did you copy LOS AOS times? Over.

Negative, Houston. You broke. Disregard. I'll get them off the flight plans.

Roger. Out.

The jet deflector that's mounted on quad 1 seems to be a good bit more wrinkled *** right now on quad 4.

You're breaking up again, Buzz.

I say the jets deflector that's mounted on quad 4 seems to be - the surface of it seems lo be more wrinkled than the one that's on quad 1. Generally, underneath part of the LM seems to have stood up quite well to the *** get some pictures in the aft part of the LM that will illuminate the thermal effects much better than we could get them up here in the front.

Roger. Out.

We're going to get some particular photographs of the bulk sample area, Neil?

Okay.

And, Houston? Buzz here. I'm showing 3.78 psi, 63 percent, no flags, adequate, slight warming *** fingered.

Roger. And Neil has 66 percent O2, no flags, minimum cooling, and the suit pressure is 382.

Houston. Roger. Out.

Buzz, this is Houston. Have you removed the closeup camera from the MESA yet? Over.

Negative. Thank you.

*** get the panorama now. Okay.

Did you get it?

Houston, how does our timeline appear to be going?

Roger. It looks like you're about a half hour slow on it. We're working on consumables. Over.

All right.

Neil and Buzz, this is Houston. To clarify my last, your consumables are in good shape at this time. The 30 minute reference was with respect to the nominal timeline. Over.

Roger. I understand that.

I don't note any abnormalities in the LM. The pods seem to be in good shape. The primary and secondary struts are in good shape. Atennas are all in place. There's no evidence of problem underneath the LM due to engine exhaust or drainage of any kind.

Roger. Out.

It's very surprising, the very surprising lack of penetration of all four of the foot pads. I'd say if we were to try and determine just how far below the surface they would have penetrated, you'd measure maybe 3 inches, wouldn't you say, Neil?

At the most, yes. That Y strut there is probably even less than that.

Nice paint job.

I get a picture of the plus Y strut taken from near the descent stage, and I think we'll be able to see a little bit better what the thermal effects are. Seem to be quite minimal.

There's one picture taken in the right rear of the spacecraft looking at the skirt of the descent stage, shows a quite darkening of the surface color, a rather minimal amount of radiating or etching away or erosion of the surface. 0n descent, both of us remarked that we could see a large amount of very fine dust particles moving out. It was reported beforehand that we would probably see an upgassing from the surface after actual engine shutdown, but as I recall, I was unable to confirm that.

This is too big an angle, Neil.

Yes. I think you are right.

We're back at the minus Z strut now. *** very little force of impact that we actually had.

And, Neil, if you'll take the camera, I'll get to work on the SEQ bay.

Okay.

Columbia, Columbia, this is Houston. I notice that -

Go ahead, Buzz.

Taking some close up pictures of that rock.

I was saying that, Houston, *** stop and take a photograph or something and then want to start moving again sideways, there's quite a tendency to start doing it with just gradual sideways hops until you start getting ***

Roger.

Can you see us underneath the LM over at the SEQ bay, Houston?

Yes indeed, Buzz. We can see your feet sticking our underneath the structure of the LM descent stage.

Okay. I'm just on the other side of the

Now we can see you through the structure of the minus Z secondary strut.

All right. The doors are open, and it looks like they are going to stay up without any problem.

Columbia, Columbia, this is Houston. We are about to lose you on the OMNI's. Request high gain antenna, REACQ mode Fish 20, yaw 135. Over.

You want to pick an area, Neil?

Make that yaw 175, Columbia, yaw 175 on the high gain.

Columbia is locked up on the high gain, Houston.

Roger. Out.

Houston, the passive seismometer has been deployed manually.

Roger.

And the manual deployment of the LR cubed, the little spring that is at the end of the string is pulled off of the picks head. However, I was able to reach up and get hold of the picks head and pull it loose. So, it will be deployed manually, also.

Roger.

And, the panorama is complete. *** and the LM - got the LM at 7 30 position at about 60 feet.

And the doors are closed and locked.

Roger.

Have you got us a good area picked out?



Yes. I think right out on that rise out there is probably as good as any.

I'll probably stay on the high ground there and

Watch it; the edge of that crater is - drops

Yes. It drops off there, doesn't it?

Get a couple of close ups on these quite rounded large boulders.

About 40 feet out - I'd say out at the end of that next

It's going to be a little difficult to find a good level spot here.

The top of that next little ridge there. Wouldn't that be a pretty good place?

All right. Should I put the LR cubed right about here?

All right.

I'm going to have to get on the other side of this rock here.

I would go right around that crater to the left there. Isn't that a level spot there?

I think this right here is just as level.

These boulders look like basalt, and they have probably 2 percent white minerals in them, the white crystals. And the thing that I reported as the vesicular before, I'm not - I don't believe I believe that any more. I think that small craters - they look like little impact craters where shot - B B shot has hit the surface.

Houston. I have the seismic experiment flipped over now, and I'm aligning it, but I'm having a little bit of difficulty getting the B B in the center. It wants to move around and around on the outside. ***

You're cutting out again, Buzz.

Roger. I say I'm not having too much success in leveling the PSE experiment.

The laser reflector is installed and the bubble is leveled and the alignment appears to be good.

Neil, this is Houston. Roger. Out.

Hey, you want to take a look at this B B and see what you make out of it?

I find it pretty hard to get perfectly level, too.

That B B likes the outside. It won't go on the inside.

That little cup is convex now, instead of concave.

I think you're right.

Believe it is.

Houston, I don't think there's any hope for using this leveling device to come up with an accurate level. It looks to me as though the cup here that the B B is in is now convex instead of concave. Over.

Roger, 11. Press on. If you think it looks level by eyeball, go ahead.

Okay.

There you go. Good work; good show. Hey, whoa; stop, stop! Back up.

Houston, as I was spacing the PSE, the right hand solar array deployed automatically. The left hand I had to manually *** the bar at the far end.

All parts of the solar array are clear of the ground now.

Buzz, this is Houston. I understand that you did successfully deploy both solar arrays. Over.

Roger. That's affirmative. And there isn't any way of telling whether that's lined up. I'm getting in the way; maybe I can get down here.

Neil, how does that appear to be pointing?

Neil, this is Houston. Over.

Go ahead, Houston.

Roger. We've been looking at your consumables, and you're in good shape. Subject to your concurrence, we'd like to extend the duration of the EVA 15 minutes from nominal. We will still give Buzz a hack at 10 minutes for heading in. Your current elapsed time is 2 plus 12. Over.

Okay. That sounds fine.

Roger. Out.

Buzz, this is Houston. If you're still in the vicinity of the PSE, could you get a photograph of the ball level? Over.

I'll do that, Buzz.

Right. We'll get a photograph of that. Houston, what time would you estimate we could allow for the documented sample? Over.

Oh, shoot. Would you believe the ball is right in the middle now?

Wonderful. Take a picture before it moves.

Neil, this is Houston. We're estimating about 10 minutes for the documented sampling. Over.

Columbia, Columbia, this is Houston. Over.

Go ahead, Houston. Columbia.

Roger. Like you to terminate charging battery Bravo at 111 plus 15. Over.

How about right now?

Roger.

Buzz, this is Houston. You've got about 10 minutes left now prior to commencing your EVA termination activities. Over.

Roger. I understand.

Tranquility Base, this is Houston. The passive seismic experiment has been uncaged and we're observing short period oscillations in it. Over.

I hope you're watching how hard I have to hit this into the ground, to the tune of about 5 inches, Houston.

Roger.

It almost looks wet.

Got a sample.

Wait a minute. Wait a minute. Wait a minute, you cut the cable again.

All right, Neil and Buzz, this is Houston. We'd like you to

MS
That clear?

Not quite.

Neil, this is Houston. We'd like you all to get two core tubes and the solar wind experiment; two core tubes and the solar wind. Over.

Roger.

Okay. While I'm getting the next one, maybe you can - ... away the box a little bit.

Buzz, this is Houston. You have approximately 3 minutes until you must commence your EVA termination activities. Over.

Roger. Understand.

Columbia, this is Houston. Approximately 1 minute to LOS. Over.

Columbia. Roger.

And, do you plan on commencing your sleep on the backside this pass? If so, we'll disable uplink to you while we're talking to the LM. Over.

Negative that.



Houston, were you able to record the documentary way where the two core tube samples were taken?

Negative. Out.

I didn't get a stereopair of those two, but they are right in the vicinity of the solar wind.

Neil, this is Houston. After you've got the core tubes and the solar wind, anything else that you can throw into the box would be acceptable.

Righto.

Cap ...

I got the cap.

Got the cap?

They're both good caps on ...

Okay.

And, you want to pick up some stuff, and I'll

Get these aseptic ones.

Move the solar wind in.

Buzz, this is Houston. It's about time for you to start your EVA closeout activities.

Roger. That's in progress.

Neil and Buzz, this is Houston. We'd like to remind you of the closeup camera magazine before you start up the ladder, Buzz.

Okay. Got that over with you, Neil?

No, the closeup camera's underneath the MESA. I'll have to pick it up with the prong. I'm picking up several pieces of really vesicular rock out here, now.

You didn't get anything in those environmental samples, did you?

Not yet.



Well, I don't think we'll have time.

Roger, Neil and Buzz. Let's press on with getting the closeup camera magazine and closing out of the sample return container. We're running a little low on time.

Roger.

Okay. Can you quickly stick this in my pocket, Neil, and I'll head on up the ladder?

Okay.

I'll hold it. You open the packet up.

... that'd kill us. Just hold it right there. Okay. Let the pocket go.

About through?

Got it.

Okay. Adios, amigo.

Okay.

Anything more before I head on up, Bruce?

Negative. Head on up the ladder, Buzz.

How are you coming, Neil?

Okay.

Did you get that solar wind rolled up there, Buzz?

Right. That's it right there.

Okay.

Think you can reach the - reach this hook that's hanging over here? You might entertain the idea of sending up the second one that way.

Okay.

Get the film off of that.

I will. Get that up now.

Okay. I'm heading on in.



Okay.

And I'll get the LEC all ready for the rock box.

Neil, this is Houston. Did the Hasselblad magazine go up on that sample return container also?

I've got the Hasselblad magazine hooked to the SRC now, yes.

Roger.

How are you doing, Buzz?

I'm okay.

About ready to send up the LEC?

Yes. Just about.

Okay.

Okay. That's got it clear.

Oh. Uh - oh. The camera came off. I mean the film pack came off.

Okay. Just ease it down now. Don't pull so hard on it. All right, let it go.

While you're getting that, I've got to get the camera.

Okay. This - This one's in. No problem.

Okay. Stand by a second.

Neil, this is Houston. Request an EMU check. Over.

Roger. Got 3.8 and I got 54 on the O2 and no flags, and my flow is in N.

Neil and Buzz, for your information, your consumables remain in good shape. Out.

Roger, How's it coming, Neil?

Okay. I've got one side hooked up to the second box and I've got the film pack on.

Okay. Good.



Boy, that bilge from on the LEC is kind of falling all over me while I'm doing this.

All that soot, huh?

That's what it looks like down here.

I think my watch stopped, Neil.

Did it?

No, it didn't either. Second hand.

Okay. If you can just kind of hold it, why, I think I can do the pulling.

Okay. Stand by a minute. Let me move back.

Okay. Easy. All right, easy in the hatch now.

Okay. I'll get it the rest of the way. And I'll give it to you to - No, wait, just a second. Yes, a little more.

Buzz?

Okay. It's unhooked.

How about that - package out of your - brief. Get that?

No.

Okay. I'll get it when I get up there.

... now?

Okay?

Okay.

Neil, this is Houston. Did you get the Hasselblad magazine?

Yes, I did. And we got about, I'd say, 20 pounds of carefully selected, if not documented, samples.

Houston. Roger. Well done. Out.



Just keep your head down close. Now start arching your back. That's good. Plenty of room. Now, all right, arch your back a little, your head up against *** Roll right just a little bit. Head down. ... in good shape.

Thank you. Am I bumping now?

No, you're clear. You're rubbing up against me a little bit.

Okay?

*** All right. That's right. A bit to the left. Okay. Now move your foot, and I'll get the hatch.

Okay.

Okay. The hatch is closed and latched, and verified secure.

Okay. Now we turn the feedwater valve - CLOSED. And I got your PLSS antenna ...

Okay. Feedwater valve's CLOSED.

And your antenna's ...

Okay.

Okay. That's out. ... I did my part ... Okay.

This is Houston. Go ahead.

***

You're cutting out, Neil. You're not readable. I understand you said something about contingency sample container on the ascent engine?

We are not reading you, Neil. Buzz, Buzz, this is Houston. Do you read? Over.

***

Tranquility Base, this is Houston. We're reading neither one of you, but standing by.

BEGIN LUNAR REV 19

Neil, this is Houston. Neil, this is Houston. Radio check. Over.

Buzz, Buzz, this is Houston. Radio check, radio check. Over.

Houston. ***

This is Houston. I copy a transmission calling Houston; all else was broken up. Over.

Neil, this is Houston. If you read, we suggest you unstow one PLSS antenna so we can have communications. Over.

Okay *** read?

A, receive. B, off.

Neil, this is Houston. We seem to be reading you now. How do,you read us? Over.

04 15 56 ??        ICS, push to talk.

Houston, this is Tranquility. How do you read?

Tranquility Base, this is Houston. Loud and clear. How us?

Loud and clear. We're in the process of switching over to LM COMM here.

Roger.

Tranquility Base, this is Houston. We'd like to verify your steerable antenna in track mode slew. We're going to do a communications handover here on Earth. Over.

Roger. That's affirmative. We're in track mode slew.

Roger. Out.

Columbia, Columbia, this is Houston. Over.

Roger, Columbia on Charlie. How do you read?

Roger, Columbia. This is Houston. Reading you loud and clear on OMNI Charlie. The crew of Tranquility Base is back inside their base, repressurized, and they're in the process of doffing the PLSS's. Everything went beautifully. Over.

Hallelujah.

And we'd like to get P00 and ACCEPT from you. We have a state vector uplink. And, after that, we'd like you to realign your platform to the new REFSMMAT that we sent up a REV or two ago. Over.

Roger. Understand. You want a option 1, P52 option 1.

Columbia, this is Houston. We're going to uplink you a new state vector, and then we'll send the REFSMMAT up again, because sending the state vector up will wipe out the one that you have on board; and then you can do a P52 option 1. Over.

P52.



Columbia, this is Houston. Do you read? Over.

Roger, Houston. Columbia's reading you.

Okay, Columbia. We've completed the uplink; the computer is yours. You can go BLOCK; however, we'd like you to hold off on the P52 option 1 align until after you've passed landing site 2; and we're requesting that you perform another P22 and attempt to find the LM this pass. I've got some numbers for you when you're ready to copy. Over.

Roger. Stand by.

Ready to copy.

Roger, Columbia. P22 landmark ID is lunar module - make that Tranquility Base; P1, 112 25 08; P2, 112 30 17, 4 nautical miles south. Time of closest approach, 112 31 52; shaft 357. 051, trunnion 047. 432, roll zero, pitch 250, yaw zero. Readback. Over.

Columbia, this is Houston. Did you copy my P22 update? Over.

Houston, Columbia.

Columbia, this is Houston. Did you copy my P22 PAD?

Columbia, this is Houston. Do you copy my PAD? Over.

Negative, Bruce. Just give me the latitude and longitude over 2, altitude, and the grid squares. Never mind the other. You're broken up.

Stand by.

Well, that is, if you have new information. Otherwise, I'll just use the old numbers.

No, wait a minute. We've got new information.



Okay.

Tranquility Base, this is Houston. Can you give us some idea of how you're progressing on the PLSS doffing and preparation for DEPRESS?

Roger, Houston. Tranquility Base. We're in the process of using up what film we have, and I'm just getting ready to change the primary ECS canister. Over.

Roger, Tranquility. We'd like to hold off as long as possible on the lithium hydroxide canister. Make that one of the last things you do in getting ready for the DEPRESS, if you can. Over.

Roger. We're planning on doing that. I was just wondering how much longer we want to wait, though. We've probably got another half an hour's worth of picture taking, and I guess we could run through an eat cycle and then change the canister, and then DEPRESS. Over.

Roger. That sounds fine to us.

Well, it'll be a little crowded in here for a while.

Well, we don't mind a bit.

Houston, Columbia. You got the new coordinates?

Columbia. This is Houston. Go ahead.

Roger, Have you got the new coordinates for me?

Roger. Latitude 00.691 - that would be plus 00.691 - and longitude over 2 is plus 11.713. The altitude is minus 1.44 nautical miles. Over.

Roger. Thank you.

Columbia, this is Houston. On latitude, make that plus 00.692, rounding off. Over.

Okay.



Okay. I read back plus 00.692, plus 11713, and minus 00144. And you have a grid square for me?

Roger. Standby.

Columbia. This is Houston. Grid coordinates: Kilo 0.9, 6.3, on LAM 2. Over.

Kilo 0.9 and 6.3. Thank you. One of these grid squares is about as much as you can scan on a single pass.

Roger.

And for your information, Columbia, you're approaching the VHF line of site COMM limit with Tranquility Base. LOS will be at 38 minutes plus 25 seconds. Over.

Roger.

Roger. And we've had to disable the one way MSFN relay owing to a ground site reconfiguration down here. Over.

Okay.

Houston, Columbia. ...

This is Houston. Go ahead. Over.

Roger. I can't see them.

Roger. I guess that takes care of the news for today, Mike.

All right. Roger.

You might be interested in knowing, Mike, that we have gotten reflections back from the laser reflector ray they deployed, and we may be able to get some information out of that a little later.

Roger. I need a very precise position, because I can only do a decent job of scanning maybe one



of those grid squares at a time. The area that we've been sweeping covers 10's and 20's and 30's of them.

Roger. We understand. This is intended to be your last P22. We don't want to use up too much fuel in this effort. Over.

Roger. How's the fuel coming?

Roger. There's no problem fuel wise. It's just that there seems to be a limit to the number of P22's and the number of grid squares you can search over.

Roger. Well, I'll continue this maneuver then to roll 82, pitch 218, yaw zero, if that's okay with you, and do a P52 in that attitude. And that'll be a sleep ...

Roger. That's fine with us. And P52 in that attitude.

Roger. A P52 and then the sleep attitude.

Tranquility Base, this is Houston. Over.

Houston, Tranquility Base. Go ahead.

Roger. When you all have a free moment, I have your T8 through T12 block data. Over.

Roger. Stand by one.

Houston, Tranquility Base. Ready to copy.

Roger, Tranquility. T8, 114 30 57; T9, 116 29 10; T10, 118 27 23; T11, 120 25 36; T12, 122 23 49. Readback. Over.

Roger. T8, 114 30 57; T9, 116 29 10; T10, 118 27 23; T11, 120 25 36; T12, 122 23 49. Over.

Readback correct. Houston out.

Houston. Columbia.

Houston, Columbia on high gain.

Houston, Tranquility Base.

Columbia. Columbia, this is Houston. Over.

Columbia in the high gain.

Roger. Reading you loud and clear on the high gain, Columbia.

Roger. Going to P52 attitude. You want a crew status report?

Say again, Columbia?

I say again, I am maneuvering to the P52 attitude, and do you want a crew status report?

Roger. And go ahead with your crew status report.

Roger. No medication. Radiation 100.16.

Houston. We copy.

Houston, Tranquility Base.

Go ahead, Tranquility.

Roger. The weight of the RCU was 12 ounces. That was by itself without the bag, and the weight of the water from the CDR's PLSS was 12 1/2 ounces. That's reading zero with the bag on.

This is Houston. We copy. And, for your information, the new LM weight after jettison of equipment including lithium hydroxide canister is 10837. Over.



Okay. 10837.

Houston, Columbia. Did you copy the P52?

Columbia, this is Houston. Affirmative.

Okay.

Tranquility Base, this is Houston. In the flight plan configuration, we show that the stability control circuit breaker ATCA on panel 16 should be open at this time. Over.

Houston, Tranquility. Say again which one should be closed?

Roger. Panel 16, row 2, STAB control ATCA, that is A T C A, and it should be open at this time. Over.

Roger. Coming open.

Roger. Out.

Housquin - Houston, Tranquility. Do you have a way of showing the configuration of the engine arm circuit breaker? Over. The reason I'm asking is because the end of it appears to be broken off. I think we can push it back in again. I'm not sure we could pull it out if we pushed it in, though. Over.

Roger. We copy. Stand by please.

Tranquility Base, this is Houston. Our telemetry shows the engine arm circuit breaker in the OPEN position at the present time. We want you to leave it open until it is nominally scheduled to be pushed in, which is later on. Over.

Roger. Copy.

Houston, Tranquility Base. The CDR's PRD reads 11014.

Roger. 11014 for the CDR.



Roger. LMP reads 09018. Over.

Roger. 09018.

Houston, Columbia. Over.

Columbia, this is Houston. Go ahead.

Roger, Bruce. When you get a few minutes could you give me some words on tomorrow's activities - when they're going to start?

Roger.

Columbia, Columbia, this is Houston. Over.

Columbia, this is Houston. Over.

Go ahead.

Roger, Mike. Couple of quick flight plan update here. First off, we'd like to get an O2 fuel cell purge at time 113 30. You - Are you copying? Over.

Roger. And copy.

Secondly, we will return to the nominal timeline with your scheduled wakeup of 121 hours and 12 minutes. We sort of slipped by lithium hydroxide canister change number 9 during the EVA and EVA PREP. We'd like you to accomplish that now. The COMM for sleep will be the normal lunar COMM configuration, the RCS configuration. We're requesting you use quads Alfa and Bravo. A DAP data load for R2 should be 01111. Readback. Over.

Roger. Oxygen fuel cell purge at 113 30. Return to the nominal timeline at 121 hours wakeup. Lithium hydroxide change number 9 right now. Normal lunar COMM sleep configuration, I'm in that now. On the RCS, I understood before you wanted to load the DAP register 2 011000 which made sense, and then later to pitch only



on quad A, enable all on quad B, and C and D off. But you don't want to do that any more, huh?

Columbia. This is Houston. On your DAP load in R2, we're requesting a 0 an four 1's, that is, 01111. Over

Okay.

And you

Load's going in right now.

Roger. And you'll be enabling quads Alfa and Bravo on the AUTO RCS select switches. Disable Charlie and Delta.

All right.

And we have a little less than 2 minutes to LOS. If you're still up, AOS next time around will be 114 04. Over.

Roger.

And, Columbia, if it's agreeable with you, we'd like you to stay awake until we have one successful reacquisition on the high gain antenna. And I guess you can plan on turning in shortly after AOS this next pass. Over.

Okay.

Roger. Out.

Tranquility Base, Tranquility Base, this is Houston. Radio check. Over.

Go ahead. Houston.

Roger. Reading you loud and clear. Just wanted to make sure we still had COMM.



Roger. We just finished up - we're just finishing up our eat period. Be ready to go back into PREP for DEPRESS.

Roger.

BEGIN LUNAR REV 20

Tranquility Base, this is Houston. Over.

Roger. Go ahead, Houston.

Roger. On your next depressurization, it's acceptable to use the overhead hatch dump valve in addition to or instead of the forward hatch dump valve to speed up the depressurization of the cabin. I have a T13 update for you, and if you could, sometime here, give us P00 and DATA; we'll uplink you a new CSM state vector. Over.

All right.

You've got the DSKY.

Roger. Your T13 time is 124 22 02. Over.

Roger. It's T13, 124 22 - is that 02? Over.

That's affirmative. That is 02. And do you have a time estimate for us until you're ready to start cabin DEPRESS? Over.

Fifteen minutes, maybe?

Roger.

Tranquility Base, this is Houston. Uplink complete. The computer's yours, and you can go out of DATA.

Roger.

Tranquility Base, Houston.



Go ahead. Tranquility Base, here.

Roger. Just want to let you guys know that since you're an hour and a half over your timeline and we're all taking a day off tomorrow, we're going to leave you. See you later.

I don't blame you a bit.

That's a real great day, guys. I really enjoyed it.

Thank you. You couldn't have enjoyed it as much as we did.

Roger.

It was great.

Sure wish you'd hurry up and get that trash out out of there, though.

Yes. We're just about to do it.

Okay.

Tranquility Base, this is Houston. We show the suit relief valve still in the AUTO position. It should be closed. Over.

Columbia, this is Houston. Over.

Houston, Columbia. Go ahead.

Roger. We've sucessfully reacquired high gain antenna. Unless you have some other traffic with us, I guess we'll bid you a good night and let you get some sleep, Mike. Over.

Okay. Sounds fine.

And we're going to power down the voice subcarrier part of our uplink to you in order that we don't disturb you while we're talking to Tranquility Base. If you need us, just give us



a call, and we can respond with a time lag of about a minute to a minute and a half in setting reconfigured. Over.

Okay. Thank you.

Roger. And good night.

Good night, Bruce. Thanks a lot.

Columbia, Columbia, this is Houston. We'd like you to ENABLE the thrusters in Bravo 1 and Bravo 2, AUTO RCS SELECT. Over.

Okay. Bravo 1 and Bravo 2 ENABLE.

Roger. Out.

Tranquility, this is Houston. For a reference, which dump valve are you using? Over.

We used the forward dump valve until about 2 psi, and we're using the overhead now.

Roger. Out.

They're both - they're both open now.

Houston, Tranquility Base. REPRESS complete.

Roger, Tranquility. We observed your equipment jettison on the TV, and the passive seismic experiment recorded shocks when each PLSS hit the surface. Over.

You can't get away with anything anymore, can you?

No, indeed.

Tranquility Base, this is Houston. Over.

Go ahead, Houston.

Roger. When you get back into your surface checklist and come over to the COMM reconfiguration on page Surface 45, we'd like you to enable the ranging feature on your S band. That is, when you come down to S band configuration, instead of CAUTION and WARNING ELECTRONICS, ENABLE TV, we'd like you to go into the RANGE position and leave it there for as long as you conveniently can until you get ready to commence your rest period; and we'll try to get a little more ranging data on you. Over.

Roger. Copy.

And of course, when you get ready to turn in, go back into caution and warning, ENABLE, and we'd like to say from all of us down here in Houston and really from all of us in all the countries and in the entire world, we think that you've done a magnificent job up there today. Over.

Thank you very much.

It's been a long day.

Yes, indeed. Get some rest there and have at it tomorrow.

Houston, Tranquility. Did you all come up with any other solution that we might try to the mission timer problem? Over.

Stand by, Tranquility. We'll be back with you in just a minute.

And, Houston, Tranquility. Have you had enough TV for today?

Tranquility, this is Houston. Yes, indeed. It's been a mighty fine presentation there.

Okay. Signing off. See you again tomorrow.



Roger.

Columbia, Colunbia, this is Houston. Over.

Go ahead, Houston.

Roger. Sorry to bother you, Columbia. Two things: we request that you select 10 degree deadband in your DAP in accordance with the procedures on Foxtrot 9 7 in your checklist; and secondly, we'd like to leave a display on the DSKY that is not one that's cycling, being continuously updated. What you have when you get through widening the deadband will be a static display, and that'll be satisfactory. Over.

Okay.

Roger. Goodnight again.

Tranquility Base, this is Houston. Over.

Roger. Go ahead.

Roger. On your mission timer, we wanted to pull the circuit breaker and let it cool down for an hour and a half to 2 hours. I believe the breaker is currently open. It has been off, so go ahead and reset the mission timer circuit breaker. Put the timer control to RESET and hold it in RESET for 30 seconds, and then slew it to your desired settings left to right, and place the timer control to START. Over.

Okay. We'll try it.

Houston, our mission timer seems to be slewing okay. You want to give us a time hack? Or can we get it off the CMC   LGC, I mean?

Roger, Tranquility. I'll give you a time hack at 114 31 00. It's about 30 seconds from now. Over.

Stand by for a Mark at 114 31.



Okay. ... you.

Stand by.

MARK.

Tranquility, this is Houston. Did you copy my Mark at 114 31?

Roger. Thank you, and our mission timer is running now.

Roger. Very good. And, I've got a consumables update for you if you're ready to copy or listen. Over.

Stand by.

Okay. Go ahead.

Okay. RCS Alfa is 81 percent, RCS Bravo 75 percent. Coming up on 115 hours GET, descent oxygen is 31.8 pounds or 59 percent; descent amp hours 858, and ascent amp hours 574. Over.

Roger. Copy. Thank you very much.

Roger. Out.

Tranquility, this is Houston. We also have a set of about 10 questions relating to observations you made, things you may have seen during the EVA. You can either discuss a little later on this evening or sometime later in the mission at your option. How do you feel? Over.

I guess we can take them up now.

Okay. And your friendly Green Team here has pretty well been relieved by your friendly Maroon Team, and I'll put Owen on with the questions.

Tranquility

Okay. Thank you, Bruce. Go ahead.



Tranquility, Houston. First question here is how your best estimate of the yaw on the - of the LM as compared to the nominal preflight plan. Over.

We got 13 degrees left on the ball, and I think that's probably about right. Looking at the shadow and so on, we prob - probably about 13 degrees left of the shadow.

Roger. That's 13 degrees left of the shadow. And, next question relates to the depth of the bulk sampling that you obtained near the first part of the EVA and any changes in composition that you might have observed during the bulk sampling interval. Over.

I'm not sure I understand that question, but we got a good bit of the ground mass in the bulk sample plus a sizable number of selected rock fragments of different types.

Roger, Neil. One of the implications here is the depth from which the bulk sample was collected. Did you manage to get down there several inches or nearer the surface? Over.

We got some down from as much as 3 inches in the area where I was looking at variation with depth in the bulk sample. There really wasn't appreciable difference, and I didn't run into any hard bed. Later on, or at some other times and other areas, why, I'd get down just a short distance, an inch or two, and couldn't go any further.

Roger. Believe we understand down as deep as 3 inches, did not hit any hard bed, and no significant changes in composition to that depth. Next question, the - the second SRC was packed rather hurriedly due to the time limitation, and wonder if you would be able to provide any more detailed description of the samples which were included in the second SRC. Over.

We got two core tubes and solar wind and about half of the big sample bag full of assorted rocks which I picked up hurriedly from around the area. I tried to get as many representative types as I could.



Roger, Neil. Next topic here relates to the rays which emanate from the DPS engine burning area. We're wondering if the rays emanating from the - beneath the engine are any darker or lighter than the surrounding surface. Over.

The ones that I saw back in the aft end of the spacecraft appeared to be a good bit darker; of course, viewed from the aft end, why, they did have the Sun shining directly on them. It seemed as though the material had been baked somewhat and also scattered in a radially outward direction, but in that particular area, this feature didn't extend more than about 2, maybe 3 feet, from the skirt of the engine. Over.

Roger. Understand that near the aft end out to the east that the rays did appear darker. I understand, Buzz, that these were - this was the appearance of the material which had been uncovered by the rays that appeared darker for 2 or 3 feet extending outward. Is that correct?

No. I wouldn't say it was necessarily material that had been uncovered. I think some of the material might have been baked or in some way caused to be more cohesive and perhaps flow together in some way, I don't know. Now, in other areas, before we started trampling around out front, why, we could see that small erosion had taken place in a radially outward direction, but it had left no significant mark on the surface other than just having eroded it away. Now, it was different back in the - right under the skirt itself. It seems as though the surface had been baked in a streak fashion, and I think a couple of pictures on film will show this. But that didn't extend out very far. Over.

Roger, Tranquility. And this baked appearance that you described, at least the suggestion is that it was due to the heat of the engine at any rate. Next subject, did

I believe so.

Roger. Next subject, did either of the solar panels on the PSE touch the surface of the Moon during deployment? Over.



I think that two corners did touch, since when it was deployed, both of them didn't come out at the same time. It unfolded a little unevenly, and of course, the terrain that it was on was a little bit - not quite as level as it was - as I would like to have it. And I think that two corners did touch to about 1 inch - no, three quarters to a half an inch deep; and maybe along the bottom, it might have been maybe 3 inches, leaving a small triangular coating on two of the corners; and I think these are on the western ones. Over.

Roger. Understand the description there. And the next subject, on the two core tubes which you collected, how did the driving force required to collect these tubes compare? Was there any difference? Over

Not significantly. I could get down to about the first 2 inches without much of a problem, and then as I would pound it in about as hard as I could do it, and the second one took two hands on the hammer, and I was putting pretty good dents in the top of the extension rod, and it just wouldn't go much more than - I think the total depth might have been about 8 or 9 inches. But even there, it didn't - For some reason it didn't seem to want to stand up straight. In other words, I'd keep driving it in and it would dig some sort of a hole but it wouldn't - just penetrate in a way that would support it and keep it from falling over, if that makes any sense at all. It didn't really to me. Over.

Roger, Buzz. I think I've got the picture. You indicate that little difference between the two samples and that in each case you got down about 2 inches without any problems and then had to continue hammering rather vigorously in order to continue driving it in to a total depth of 8 or 9 inches, and even at that point the rods did not want to stay vertical, that they'd tend to fall over on you even after pounding in that far. Is that correct?

Yes. That's about it. It wasn't a rapid change in resistive force. And also I noticed when I took the bit off that the material was quite well packed, a good bit darker, and it - The way it adhered to the core tube gave me the distinct impression of being moist. Over.



Roger. Understand the general impression of being moist as it packed in the core tube. Next question: we did copy your comments prior to the EVA of your general description of the area. We wonder if either of you would have any more lengthy description or more detailed description of the general summary of the geology of the area. Over.

Yes let's - we'll - We'll postpone our answer to that one until tomorrow. Okay?

Yes, indeed. That'll be fine. Just a couple more here, and I think these may not be quite as lengthy as number 7 there. Can you estimate the stroke of the primary and secondary struts? Over.

Well, I could do it like this, Owen. About all the struts are about equally stroked, and the height from the ground to the first step is about 3 feet or maybe 3 and 1/2 feet, huh?

Roger. Understand, Neil. Next topic, as - just after landing, you pointed out that there was a hill to the west along the plus Z axis from the LM. Are there any large rocks in that direction that might block the solar ray during the sunset - as sunset approaches in your locality - Are there any large rocks that might tend to obscure the ray? Over.

No. I don't believe so, I think that it's - It's about as level as any other areas that we chose.

Roger. I

There's nothing large, anyway, that's going to get in the way.

Roger. Copy. That's also the way it appeared from the television, I think. And now the final question. You commented, Neil, that on your approach to the landing spot, you had passed over a football field sized crater containing rather large blocks of solid rock perhaps 10 to 15 feet in size. Can you estimate the distance to this football sized crater from your present position? Over.



I thought we'd be close enough so that when we got outside we could see its rim back there but I couldn't. But I don't think that we're more than a half mile beyond it. That is a half mile west of it.

Roger. So you estimate your present position less than half a mile approximately west of this large crater. Over.

That's correct.

Okay. Well, that takes care of the questions from our geologists for tonight, and unless you have something else, that'll be all for - from us for the evening. Over.

Okay. Thank you.

Tranquility Base, Houston. We've now collected all the ranging data that we can use, and you can go back to caution and warning ENABLE. Over.

Roger. Will do.

Tranquility Base, Houston. Over.

Go ahead, Houston.

Roger. Two more verifications, here. Can you - will you verify that the disk with messages was placed on the surface as planned, and also that the items listed in the flight plan - all of those listed there were jettisoned. Over.

That's - All that's verified.

Roger. Thank you, and I hope this will be a final good night.

Okay.

BEGIN LUNAR REV 21

REST PERIOD - NO COMMUNICATIONS

APOLLO 11 AIR-TO-GROUND VOICE TRANSCRIPTION


BEGIN LUNAR REV 22

REST PERIOD - NO COMMUNICATIONS

APOLLO 11 AIR-TO-GROUND VOICE TRANSCRIPTION


BEGIN LUNAR REV 23

REST PERIOD - NO COMMUNICATIONS

APOLLO 11 AIR-TO-GROUND VOICE TRANSCRIPTION


Columbia, Columbia, good morning from Houston.

Hi, Ron.

Hey, Mike, how's it going this morning?

How goes it?

Hey, real fine. While you're

I don't know yet, how's it going with you?

Real fine here. Columbia, request P00 and ACCEPT. We'll shove the state vector in for you right away.

Okay. It's coming up now, Columbia. We're going to keep you a little busy here. As soon as we get the state vector in, we'd like you to go ahead and do a P52 option 3 on this night pass, and then when you come on around the other side there, we'll give you some landmark tracking information on prime 130.

Okay.

And for your information, we're also going to have Tranquility Base do a P52 when you come around the other time; and I have the P22 information if you're ready to copy.

Go ahead.

Okay. Track landmark 130 prime using P22, and for information, this will properly position your rendezvous radar transponder. T1 is 122 plus 16 plus 05 - whoops, okay. Stand by.

Columbia, Houston. The computer is yours.

Okay. And I'd like the grid square of this crater 130 prime. Over.

Columbia, Houston. Say again about 130 prime.



I'd like its grid square, please.

Roger. Stand by.

Columbia, Houston.

Go ahead.

Roger. I have the T1 and T2 times and also the longitude of the 130 prime. We're working on the grid squares and we'll get them shortly.

Okay. Ready to copy.

Okay. T1: 122 plus 16 plus 05. Tango 2 is 122 plus 21 plus 11, and 6 miles north of track. And do you want your NOUN 89 values?

Yes, please.

Roger. Latitudes, plus 01.243. Longitude over 2, plus 11.844. Altitude, minus 001.46. Over.

Copy T1: 122 16 05. T2: 122 21 11, 6 miles north, NOUN 89 is plus 01243, plus 11844, minus 00146.

Columbia, affirmative. And at the T1 time, put your rendezvous radar transponder switch to OPERATE.

All right.

And this 130 prime is the same one that you tracked prior to descent. Over.

Okay. You've updated your information as to the LM's position and this is your best estimate of where the LM is, is that correct?

Columbia, that's negative. This 130 is the little bitty crater there that you tracked - John Young's crater - that you tracked prior to descent. And we want that

Fine. Okay. You've given up looking for that.



Affirmative. We want this for one last fix on your plane.

All right. Fine. Understand. Thank you.

And when the LM does his P22 on your transponder, well then, that'll be our last shot at the LM's position.

Roger. Understand. Do you care whether my transponder is on before T1?

Roger. It'll be on WARMUP prior to that time, and you can go to OPERATE anywhere around that time.

Yes. I gather it's on its 24 minute warmup now?

Roger.

And, Houston. The computer is yours, you can go to BLOCK anytime.

Roger. BLOCK, going P52, option 3.

Roger. And we'll see you coming around the other side. About 1 minute to go, and all your systems are looking good.

Thanks, Ron.

BEGIN LUNAR REV 24

Tranquility Base, Tranquility Base, Houston. Over.

Good morning, Houston. Tranquility Base. Over.

Roger. Loud and clear. And how is the resting standing up there. Did you get a chance to curl up on the engine can?

Roger. Neil has rigged himself a really good hammock with a waste tether, and he's been lying



on the ascent engine cover, and I curled up on the floor. Over.

Roger. Copy, Buzz. Got a couple of changes to your surface checklist here, and in general, what we're going to want you to do is P22, tracking the command module for one last hack on your position there. And this will be - in other words, P57, P22, and then to press on with the checklist, and the rest of them are a couple of minor changes in the checklist. The main one being that we do not want the rendezvous radar on during the ascent, and we think that this will take care of some of the overflow of program alarms which we're getting during descent.

Okay. We had the rendezvous radar in SLEW during descent, though.

Tranquility Base, Houston. I missed that. Say again.

Roger. I say again. We had the rendezvous radar switch in the SLEW position, not the LGC position.

Roger. We copy that. But there's a greater duty cycle on - There's a good 15 percent duty cycle on the ascent program there, so just go ahead and leave it off. And I have the changes there if you want to get out your surface checklist, and I can go ahead and start giving them to you.

All right. Go ahead. I've got it out.

Okay. Before we start here, request P00 and DATA, and we'll give you some vectors.

Now you've got P00 and DATA.

Okay. And on Surface 50 will be the first change there.

Okay. And I understand you want us to do a P57 option 3 and then a P22, is that the general idea? Over.

That's affirmative. So on Surface 50 there, down at the bottom of the page, just after PRO after two recycles, stick in a time of 122 plus 15; do P22 as per PGNS 20 of G&amp;N dictionary. Over.



Roger. Understand that's 122 15, do P22 as per PGNS 20, G&amp;N dictionary.

Roger. Okay. Let's skip on over to Surface 59.

Okay.

Okay. This is going to be for one last vent on the DPS tank there, so at the top of the page just after EPS INVERTER 1, CLOSE, add - Okay, after EPS INVERTER 1, CLOSE, add PROP DESCENT HELIUM REG/VENT CLOSE, and then after STABILIZATION/CONTROL AELD, CLOSE, add PROP DISPLAYS/ENGINE 0VERRIDE/LOGIC, CLOSE. Over.

Roger. Copy. These are two circuit breakers, right?

Tranquility Base, affirmative. Those are just the circuit breakers at that time.

Tranquility Base, Houston. Did you get those two on the propulsion circuit breakers?

Roger. I have those two.

Okay. Let's go over to Surface 60, and then down the middle of the page, after launch guidance system recommendation from MSFN, then I add the switches there.

Roger. Go ahead then.

Okay. After launch guidance system recommendation from MSFN, add DESCENT PROPULSION FUEL VENT, OPEN; add DESCENT PROPULSION OXIDIZER VENT, OPEN; add verify talkback gray. Over.

Roger. DESCENT PROPELLANT FUEL VENT, OPEN; DESCENT PROPELLANT OXIDIZER VENT, OPEN; verify talkback gray.

Roger. You got that one, so that'll be the last vent and it will continue venting. Skip over to Surface 61 down there at TIG minus 17.

Roger. I'm there. Go ahead.



Okay, at TIG minus 17, delete CB (11). AC Bus A, RENDEZVOUS RADAR, CLOSE, wait 30 seconds; delete PGNS: RENDEZVOUS RADAR, CLOSE; and then add UP DATA LINK switch to VOICE BACKUP. Over

Roger. I have that. We'll leave those two circuit breakers open, and have the UP DATA LINK to VOICE BACKUP; and we'll make the appropriate changes on the following circuit breaker status card.

Roger. And then you might add a little note down there at the bottom of the page - Note: - This is at the bottom of page 61 - Note: Do not use tape meter in PGNS, i.e., do not place MODE SELECT switch to PGNS. Over.

Okay. We'll put it in AGS.

Roger. Fair enough. That's some more of that computer load business.

Okay. That's all the changes we have for the checklist here. I've got some - just some general notes, I'll read to you on P22, and just for some information. Over.

Okay. Then it looks to me like we ought to get hopping on this P57.

Roger. We agree wholeheartedly. And while you're starting on that, I'll read - just read these notes on P22. Call P22 possible program alarm 5.6, range greater than 400 nautical miles, and then use the P22 as described on PGNS 20. Take option 1 in NOUN 06, and use the no update mode. The rendezvous radar will lock on at about 25 degrees elevation above the horizon. If 503 alarm occurs, designate fail. Key a PROCEED and allow the rendezvous radar to search for the CSM. And place the range altitude monitor switch in altitude/altitude rate to prevent the tape meter from driving into the stops. And press on.

Roger. I think I have that.

Columbia, Columbia, Houston. Over.

Columbia, Columbia, Houston. Over.



Houston, Columbia.

Roger, Columbia. We'd like a CRYO stir in all four tanks and the standard 1 minute. Over.

In work.

Roger. And do you have any torquing angles from the P52?

Roger. Stand by one.

Tranquility, Houston. Request ERROR RESET at this time. Over.

Roger. ERROR RESET, and would you tell me when you're satisfied with the LGC self test?

Tranquility, LGC is a GO.

Roger.

Torquing angles when you're ready.

Columbia, Houston. Go ahead.

Roger. Stars 25 and 42; angle difference 5 balls; NOUN 93, plus 00165, plus 00186, minus 00039, time of torquing 121 15. Over.

Columbia, Houston. We copy. Thank you.

And CRY0 stir complete.

Roger. Thank you, Columbia.

Houston, Tranquility. Would you like a recycle on the VERB 6 04? Over.

Tranquility, Houston, We copy. Stand by one.

Tranquility, Houston. Request recycle.

Houston, Columbia. My rendezvous radar transponder is operating.

Spacecraft calling Houston? Say again.

This is Columbia saying the rendezvous radar transponder is operating.

Roger. Copy, Columbia.

Tranquility, Houston. Request rendezvous radar breakers in about now.

Columbia, Houston. Request OMNI D - OMNI Delta.

Tranquility Base, Houston. Request you go ahead and start the warmup on the rendezvous radar.

Roger.

Houston, you copying NOUN 93?

Tranquility, affirmative. Go.

Roger. We're going to a torque.

Houston. Roger.

Tranquility Base, Houston. Columbia will be overhead at 122 plus 22 plus 51. His LOS will be 29 35. Over.

Roger.

Houston, we'd like to check this on the tape meter against the AGS. We'll go back to altitude - altitude rates as soon as the rate starts to build up. Over.

Tranquility, Houston. Roger.

On second thought, since that will peg the range rate, I guess maybe we'd better not do that. And



for this range that the AGS are showing now, 425 miles with a signal strength of 2.2. It looks like we ought to proceed on this. Over.

Roger. Stand by one. Tranquility, affirmative. Proceed.

Are you getting the information on the downlink now?

Tranquility, affirmative, and we're saving it. We've got 4 so far, and it's looking good.

Okay. What do you people think about calling up a VERB 83?

Tranquility, Houston. Stand by on that now. We're getting the data now. We're checking on the VERB 83.

And we expect that we may lose lock when it passes overhead because of the MAX rate that the radar has.

Tranquility, Houston. Negative on VERB 83.

Understand.

We just lost lock.

Tranquility, Houston. Go.

They've just lost lock, Ron.

Roger. We had about 20 some points before you did that. And for your information, the reason the AGS is a little different there - The reason the AGS is a little different is because the K factor is a little bit wrong.

Has he already gone? Over. Okay. Okay. Has he already gone overhead, or do you want us to try and get in lock on again?

Houston, Columbia. You got NOUN 49. Five good marks.



Tranquility, affirmative. Try to lock on again, and you'll lose him at about 29 minutes and 35 seconds.

Okay. Do you have a real quick procedure how to do that?

Columbia, Houston. Say again about your NOUN 49.

I say I got five good marks. You got NOUN 49. When you get everything you need off the downlink, let me know.

Columbia, Houston. Stand by one.

Ron, did you say on the 526 alarm to proceed or do a VERB 32?

Roger. It's just that radar thinks the range is greater than 400 miles now.

Tranquility Base, Houston. Recommend you terminate P22. Over.

Roger. Will do.

And, Columbia, Houston. Same for you. You can terminate P22.

I have. I'm running fast.

Roger.

I'm staying in P22 here a second just to record the NOUN 89 and then over VERB 34.

Columbia, Houston. Roger. We copy, and that's good.

Tranquility, Houston.

Roger. Go ahead.

Roger. Request S BAND FUNCTION switch to RANGE. We're going to do some ranging on you. Also, I have an updated AGS K factor when you are ready to copy. Over.



Roger. Go ahead with the K factor.

Roger. 119 plus 59 plus 59.92. Over.

Roger. A little closer this time.

Yes. It sure is.

119 59 5992. Over.

Tranquility, Houston. Readback correct.

Columbia, Houston

Houston, Tranquility. I see what you mean now about the K factor.

Roger.

This is Columbia. Go ahead. And I'd like to know about this P52 coming up. Is that the one I just completed or do you want a pair of them back to back?

Columbia, Houston. You do not need to do another P52 unless you want to. Break. And also, Columbia, when you get a chance, request BATT C and the PYRO readouts. Over.

BATT C says 37 volts even. PYRO A, 37. PYRO B, 37.

Columbia, Houston. Roger. We copy. Thank you.

BATT bus B is 37. BATT bus A is 36, or I'd think the gauge is stuck.

Roger. And you're looking good to us - to us, Columbia.

Yes sir. Keep it that way.

Columbia is coming up on a VERB 45 ENTER to reset the surface flag.

Columbia, Houston. Negative. Stand by on the VErB 45.



Roger that.

And a crew status report from Columbia. I figure I got about 5 hours' good sleep, although you guys probably know better than I do.

Columbia. Roger. We copy.

Columbia, Houston. We've got a couple more vectors to send up to you. They'll be coming up shortly and then you can do the VERB 45 after you get those in. Over.

Okay. That's fine. Just wanted to make sure that we're both in SYNC on the order.

Roger.

Columbia and Tranquility Base, this is Houston. In case you haven't noticed, the MSFN relay is not activated, so I can go ahead and relay anything if you want to talk directly.

Columbia. Roger.

Houston, Tranquility. Be advised we've got

Coming ... on schedule showing red right now. We just put a VERB 77 in. I believe that there's ... let me check here.

Tranquility Base, Houston. We've got a lot of static down here. Could you say again?

Roger. We have four out of eight circuit breaker talkbacks indicating red. We still have the circuit breakers out as of right now. I believe at this moment we have just entered VERB 77 on tape 3052 and are ready to proceed with the hot fire. Is it normal to have these four red flags? Over.

Tranquility Base, Houston. We think that's okay. Go ahead and reset them and press on with the hot fire. Over.



Roger. They are reset.

Columbia, Columbia, Houston. Request P00 and ACCEPT, and we'll send some state vectors up to you.

Here we going P00 and ACCEPT.

Houston, Tranquility. I used Capella in the last sighting, and it's a good ways near the edge. A good ways away from the center of detent 4. I'm wondering if it would pay any to use Alpheratz, star number 1. It might be a little closer. However, it would delay things a little, since I'd have to designate the radar out of the way. Over.

Tranquility. Roger. We copy. Stand by 1. And, break, break, Columbia. We're having a little trouble getting the stuff in there. Request high gain, pitch minus 20, yaw plus 150. Over.

And, Tranquility, Houston. We'd prefer to save the time; press on with Capella. Over.

Roger.

And, Tranquility, Houston. The RCS check looked mighty fine to us.

It looks good up here.

Columbia, Columbia, Houston. Over.

Columbia, Houston. Over.

Columbia, Houston in the blind - high gain. Pitch minus 20, yaw plus 150.

Houston, Tranquility. Could you give me the fixed portion of the ascent PAD so I can load it in for a P57? Over.

Tranquility. Roger. Stand by one. We want to wait on that P57 until about TIG minus 50 minutes. Over.

Roger.



Columbia, Columbia, Houston. Over.

Columbia, Columbia, Houston. Over.

Houston, Tranquility. It turns out that detent 4 isn't usable anyway with the yaw that we have, because the Earth appears in both detent 2 and detent 3.

Tranquility Base, Houston. Roger.

Columbia, Houston. Over.

Tranquility, Houston. I have your LM ascent and CSI data PAD's when you are ready to copy.

We're ready to copy.

Roger. LM ascent PAD: TIG 124 22 00 00 00 NOUN 76 55349 00322, plus 0017; DEDA 47, plus 37104, minus 70470, plus 58604, plus 56936. Your LM weight 10837. Your T14 126, plus 20, plus 12. Over.

What figure is the crossrange and NOUN 76?

Roger. Your crossrange for NOUN 76 - By the way, we may update this later, but now it is plus 0017. Over.

Roger. Readback follows. TIG 124 22 0000 55349 00322, plus 0017, plus 37104, minus 70470, plus 58604, plus 56936. LM weight 10837. T14, 126 20 12. Go.

Tranquility, Houston. Roger. Your readback correct. Now I have your CSI PAD.

Going to CSI PAD.

Roger. CSI PAD. TIG of CSI 125 19 3470; TIG of TPI 126 57 0000; NOUN 81, 0532 plus 0000; FDAI NA; DEDA 373 03196; DEDA 275 04170; NOUN 86 plus 0532, plus 0000, plus 0012. Tranquility readback.



CSI Apollo PAD follows. TIG 125 19 3470; TIG of TPI 126 57 0000; NOUN 81, 0532, plus all zeroes, 373 03196 275 04170; NOUN 86 plus 0532, plus 0000, plus 0012. Go.

Tranquility Base, Houston. Your readback is correct. And, Tranquility, no need for any GYRO compensation. It's GO.

Roger. Understand.

Columbia, Houston. Over.

Columbia, Houston in the blind. Request high gain. Pitch minus 30, yaw plus 170. Over.

Houston, Columbia on the high gain. Over.

Roger, Columbia. We still need to finish your uplink there, and then I have your CSI and TPI times and also the lift off.

Go ahead. Ready to copy.

Roger. LM ascent lift off time: 124 22 0000. Your CSI TIG, say again CSI TIG: 125 19 3470. Your TIG of TPI: 126 57 0000. And the LM's NOUN 81 values for CSI: 0532 - that's 53.2 for DELTA VX, DELTA VY all zeros. Columbia, Houston. Over.

Roger. I readback lift off TIG 124 22 even, CSI 125 19 3470, TPI 126 57 even, the LM's NOUN 81 for CSI 53.2 DELTA VX. Over.

Columbia, Houston. Roger. Your readback correct.

Columbia, Houston. We're coming up with your second load now.

Roger that.

Columbia, Houston. The computer is yours, and you can do your VERB 45 ENTER now.

Roger. Go into BLOCK and VERB 45 ENTER.



Roger.

How's the Black Team today? All primed and raring to go?

You bet you there, Mike.

Good signal.

Columbia, Houston. About 3 minutes to LOS, and I have your consumables update.

Ready to copy.

Roger. At 123 plus 00, RCS total minus 7 percent, Alfa minus 12 percent, Bravo plus 4.5, Charlie minus 7, Delta minus 6.5. Your hydrogen total minus 1.4 pounds, oxygen - oxygen plus 1.7. Over.

Whoever figured those hydrogens and oxygens out a couple of days ago must have known what he was doing.

Okay. I think I read that oxygen - it's a plus 17 pounds.

Roger. Still close.

Roger.

Eagle and Columbia, this is the backup crew. Our congratulations for yesterday's performance, and our prayers are with you for the rendezvous. Over.

Thank you, Jim.

Thank you, Jim.

Glad to have all you big room full of people looking over our shoulder.

We had a lot of help down there, Jim.



And, Houston, Tranquility Base is going to give you a few comments with regard to the geology question of last night. We are landed in a relatively smooth crater field of elongate secondary - circular secondary craters, most of which have rims irrespective of their - raised rims irrespective of their size. That's'not universally true. There are - There are a few of the smaller craters around which do not have a discernable rim. The ground mass throughout the area is a very fine sand to a silt. I'd say the thing that would be most like it on Earth is powdered graphite. Immersed in this ground mass are a wide variety of rock shapes, sizes, textures, rounded and angular, many with varying consistencies. As I said, I've seen plain - what looked to be plain basalt and vesicular basalt. Others with no crystals, some with small white phenocrysts, maybe one to less than 5 percent. And the bould - we are in a boulder field where the boulders range generally up to 2 feet with a few larger than that. Now, some of the boulders are lying on top of the surface, some are partially exposed, and some are just barely exposed. And in our traverse around on the surface and particularly working with the scoop, we've run into boulders below the surface - it was probably buried under several inches of the ground mass.

Tranquility, Houston. Roger. Very fine description.

I suspect this boulder field may have some of its origin with this large sharp edged rocky rim crater that we passed over at final descent. Now yesterday I said that was about the size of a football field, and I have to admit it was a little - little hard to measure coming in. But I thought that it might just fit in the Astrodome as we came by it. And the rocks in the vicinity of the - of this rocky rim crater are much larger than these in this area. Some are 10 feet or so and perhaps bigger, and they are very thickly populated out to about one crater diameter beyond the crater rim. Beyond that, there is some diminishing, and even out in this area the blocks seem to run out in rows with irregular patterns, and then there are paths between them where there are considerably less surface evidence of hard rocks. Over.



Tranquility Base, Houston. We copy. Thank you very much.

And, Tranquility Base, we're through with the ranging. You can take your S band function switch to OFF RESET.

Roger.

And, Tranquility, I have a LM consumables update for you.

Roger. Ready to copy.

Okay. At 123 plus 00, RCS Alfa 78 - 78 percent PQMD, Bravo is 76 percent PQMD, descent O2 is 62 percent - 62 percent. Descent ampere hours are 590, 590 remaining, ascent ampere hours are 574, 574 remaining. Over.

Roger. Copy. Sounds very good. Thank you.

Roger.

Tranquility Base, Houston.

Go ahead, Houston.

Roger. For your P57 ..., we did a little looking around, and it looks like Sirius and Rigel out at detent 6 would be real good on that. The Sun angle on Sirius is about 43 degrees, and on Rigel, it's about 55 degrees. Over.

Roger, Houston. The only trouble is that the Sun is in number 5, the closed one. And it appears to also be close enough to detent 6 to shine on the far side of the cone. And it completely obscures detent 6. I'm - unable to use that at all.

Okay. We understand it now, and thank you.

Tranquility, Houston. For your information, the circuitry looks real fine on that ascent engine arm circuit breaker.



Roger. I don't think I could get it out now if I wanted to.

Roger. We copy.

And it looks like in detent 6 I can pick up Venus right at the fringe, but I can't get anything else.

Roger.

And by the way, Houston, our EVA antenna did retract.

Roger. Mighty fine. Thank you.

Tranquility, Houston.

Roger. Go ahead.

Roger. It looks like you're going to have to reposition the radar here. We suggest you may want to start your TIG minus 45 minute - that point in the checklist at about TIG minus 50. Over.

Roger. Why do you think I need to move the radar?

Well, we thought that you probably wouldn't be able to get the star there.

On the rear detent, the radar can be pointing plus X, and I'm - I'll be using right rear. That's okay.

Roger. That's fine then.

Tranquility Base, Houston. I have one more late checklist change there on the rendezvous radar position for lift off. Over. From page Surface 57.

Roger. Go ahead.

Okay. On Surface 57 there on your VERB 21 NOUN 73 trunnion, leave it 180; the shaft we'd like 335. Over.



Roger. Understand. Shaft 335.

Roger. And if the steerable doesn't quite hack it on lift off, looks like the forward OMNI is good for about 30 to 60 seconds after lift off. And then the aft OMNI antenna is good for the rest of the ascent. Over.

Roger. Copy.

Houston, we've got two angles here at 3 minutes in ascent. Would you confirm those? Pitch 134 and yaw minus 32. Over.

Tranquility Base. Roger. We verify; those are correct.

Tranquility Base, Houston.

Go ahead.

Roger. Eagle's looking real fine to us down here. We have a fairly high confidence that we know the position of the LM. However, it is possible that we may have a planes change, but the - In the worst case, it would be up to 30 feet per second. And, of course, we don't expect that at all.

BEGIN LUNAR REV 25

Okay.

Houston, Tranquility Base. Since we've still got plenty of time I think I'll go ahead and recycle on this 604.

Tranquility. Roger. That's okay with us, and we assume that the primary canister is still aboard. Is this correct?

We have one primary canister on board and one secondary. The other primary is - out in front of the Z - plus - Z pad. Over.

Roger. We copy. Thank you.



Ready for the blue bag

The PGNS looks consistent today.

Hey, that's affirmative, by gosh. Looking great.

Houston, did you copy NOUN 05, and are you looking at 93? Over.

Tranquility Base. It's beautiful.

Okay. We'll proceed.

Roger.

I know where the star is; I'm not sure the PGNS knows where gravity is.

Okay.

Houston, these are your angles, not ours.

Roger, Tranquility.

Stand by for some change or modification in the angles.

Tranquility Base, Houston. Recommend 334, and that should just keep it out of the limit.

Okay.

Houston, Columbia on 0MNI D Delta. Over.

Columbia, Houston. Roger. Loud and clear. And if you would like to take it down, we have the latest position of Tranquility Base. Over.

Go ahead.

Roger. It's just west - at west crater, Juliett 0.5, 7.7. Over.

Understand that it is just west of the crater Juliett 0.5 and 7.7. Is that correct?

Columbia, Houston. That is correct.

Okay. Thank you, Ron.



Tranquility Base, Houston.

Go ahead.

Roger. Because of the lower load with the rendezvous radar off, we'd like to have battery 5 and 6 on the line now, 1 and 3 off. Over.

In work.

Roger. Thank you.

Columbia, Houston. You're still looking mighty fine to us.

Columbia is holding inertially at lift off attitude, my DAP is configured as per my procedures at a time of 124 02.

Columbia, Houston. Roger. We copy you.

I'm using B and D roll.

Tranquility, Houston. Say again.

Houston, we were not calling.

Roger. Columbia, was that Bravo and Delta roll? Over.

Columbia, affirmative.

Roger.

Columbia and Tranquility, I'll give you a Mark at 20 minutes to go, and that's in about 20 seconds.

Stand by.

MARK.

20 minutes.



Columbia. Roger.

Tranquility Base, Houston.

Go ahead.

Roger. Just a reminder here, we want to make sure you leave the rendezvous radar circuit breakers pulled. However, we want the rendezvous radar mode switch in LGC, Just as it is on Surface 59.

Okay.

Tranquility Base, Houston.

Roger. Go ahead.

Roger. Our guidance recommendation is PGNS, and you're cleared for takeoff.

Roger. Understand. We're number 1 on the runway.

Roger.

Houston, Tranquility. We're not sure that we got number 2 tank to fire. It's still showing a high pressure.

Roger. We confirm that. Try it again.

Okay. We'll go to number 2 this time.

Roger. we concur.

Roger. No problem.

Houston, looks like there's very little difference between the two.

Roger.

We've got number 2 reading 3050 and number 1 is reading - 3000 and it drops down to 2990.



So I'm not sure that it's really indicative that it didn't go. Over.

Roger. We copy and we agree.

Okay. I assume we're - we're GO for lift off, and we'll proceed with the ascent feed.

Roger. That's correct, and we'll go ahead and watch tank 2. If it doesn't - tank 2 doesn't decrease, we'll tell you to close the ascent feeds and open the shutoffs. Over.

Okay. Ascent feeds are open and shutoffs are closed.

Roger.

And I've got the cross feed on.

Tranquility Base, little less than 10 minutes here. Everything looks good and we assume the steerable's in track mode AUTO.

Roger. It is in track mode AUTO.

Roger.

And both ED batteries are GO.

Tranquility, Houston. Roger.

Neil, I'm reading you on VHF. You sound good.

Yes sir. Couldn't be better. It's just purring along.

Rate scale, 25?

25.

ATT translation, four jets. Balance couple ON.



Balance couple, ON.

TTCA jets, PROP PUSHBUTTON RESET, ABORT, ABORT STAGE RESET.

55 04 17 32        RESET.

DEADBAND, MINIMUM. ATT CONTROL to MODE CONTROL; MODE CONTROL, AUTO, both.

AUTO, AUTO.

Okay. We're standing by for 2 minutes to - for the guidance steering in the AGS.

Eagle, Houston. You're looking good to us.

Roger.

MARK.

TIG minus 2.

Roger. Guidance steering in the AGS.

Okay. MASTER ARM ON.

DSKY blanks.

Got that ascent ... ?

9, 8, 7, 6, 5, abort stage, engine arm ascent, proceed.

... Beautiful.



26, 36 feet per second up. Be advised of the pitchover. Very smooth. Balance couple, OFF. Very quiet ride. There's that one ... on now.

Eagle, Houston. Request manual start override.

Roger.

Eagle, Houston. One minute and you're looking good.

Roger.

A very quiet ride, just a little bit of slow wallowing back and forth. Not very much thruster activity.

Roger. Mighty fine.

700, 150 up, beautiful. 9000. PGNS AGS agrees within a foot per second.

Eagle, Houston. You're looking good at 2. PGNS, AGS, and MSFN all agree.

And that's a thousand, 170 up, beautiful. 14 000. And a foot per second again, AGS to PGNS.

S band looks like it's holding good, Houston.

Roger. We concur. It's great.

1500, 185.

Eagle, Houston. You're GO at 3 minutes. Everything's looking good.

Roger.

Right on H dot.



Coming up to, ... to the right.

this is H dot MAX now.

We're going right down U.S. 1.

Roger.

Eagle, Houston. Four minutes; you're going right down the track. Everything's great.

Now we got - got Sabine off to our right now.

Roger.

240 to go.

Okay. There's Ritter out there. There it is, right there, there's Schmidt Man, that's impressive looking, isn't it?

Eagle, Houston. You're looking good.

... 55.

Looking good here. It's a pretty spectacular ride.

... of to the right.

Eagle, Houston. You're still looking mighty fine.

Roger. Good agreement in DELTA V to go in both AGS and PGNS.

Roger.

Got 800 to go.

700 to go. Okay, I'm going to open up the main shutoffs.



Ascent feed closed; pressure's holding good, cross feed ON, 350 to go.

Stand by on the engine arm. 90, okay, OFF, 50.

SHUTDOWN.

We got 53373, 32.8 feet per second, 60 666.

Eagle. Roger. We copy. It's great. Go.

And we got - got our residuals.

Eagle, Houston. Trim residuals.

We're working on it.

Eagle, Houston. Trim looks good.

That's good.

Eagle, Columbia. ... got a solid lock on in VHF ranging and ... 480 feet per second.

Okay. That sounds a little - little on the high side.

Yes. I'll update it here shortly.

Okay.

Okay, Houston. We show 47.3 by 9.5.

Roger. 47.2 by 9.5.



AGS has 9.5, 46.6.

Eagle, Houston. Copy.

Eagle, Houston. Request abort stage, reset, ... PROP reset, and mode control to ATT HOLD when you get a chance to.

Roger.

Eagle, Houston. You can go ahead and proceed with P52 as per nominal.

Roger, Houston. The Eagle is back in orbit, having left Tranquility Base and leaving behind a - a replica from our Apollo 11 patch and the olive branch.

Eagle, Houston. Roger. We copy. The whole world is proud of you.

We had a lot of help down there.

Eagle, Columbia. I've got 470 now for R dot, and I just broke lock. Could you hold silent for a few seconds here while I reacquire.

Columbia's reacquired you.

Columbia, Houston. Request P00 in ACCEPT, and we'll give you a good GO LM vector. Over.

Roger. Houston. Going to ACCEPT.

Eagle, Houston. You can go ahead and turn your updata link switch off.

Roger. It's off.

Roger.

Columbia, Houston. The computer is yours. Press on.



Okay.

Houston, the AGS has a DELTA H of 15.5.

Eagle, Houston. Roger. 15.5.

And a maneuver of - and a maneuver of 51.3.

Roger. We copy. And, Eagle, aft OMNI. Over.

Roger. Aft OMNI.

Columbia, Houston.

Roger. It's on.

And I can see it reflecting out my ...

Eagle, Houston in the blind. Try low bit rate. Over.

Roger. Low bit rate. I've got a 3.8 signal strength. Over.

Eagle, Houston. Roger. We copy your signal strength 3.8.

37, I believe.

Eagle, Houston.

Roger. Go ahead.

Roger. We saw a very slight jump in cabin and suit pressure there. Could you verify cabin REPRESS valve is closed?



Okay. It's closed.

Roger. And we've got about 1 minute to before where you ought to be radar tracking, and we've lost data with you.

Okay. ...

Okay. Get a pass.

Got it? ...

Eagle, Columbia. You can turn your ... light off.

Okay. You got it?

Yes.

All ready to mark, X and Y. Okay. Marked X now.

X or Y? Maybe we ought to be satisfied with three of them.

Columbia, Houston

... is still on.

Say again.

X or Y?

***



I can't tell.

Okay. Mark Y.

That enough? Beautiful! All zeros. Okay. Let's torque them. I'll write them down. Minus 06, plus 64, plus ... 7. Torque ... Radar circuit breakers in?

***

Yes. We're pointed down pretty much. We're going to be up

Okay. ... circuit

Roger.

breaker in? Both circuit breakers in?

***

MS
***

Okay. AUTO maneuver.

***

Columbia, Houston. Did you call?

That's affirmative. I called you before about the VHF ranging. It's not working. ***

Houston, Eagle. Did you copy our star angle difference and torquing angles.

Eagle, Houston. We didn't have them on the downlink but we copied them on the VOX.

Okay. It was zero for star angle difference, minus 06, plus 64, and plus 1.37. Over.

Eagle, Houston. Roger. We have that.

That's it. Got a good lockon, Houston.

... take that.

How about that?

Your really think its apogee is 125 21, huh? 25 ... That circuit breaker is in.

Engine arm circuit breaker.

Okay. There's a mark. Buy that?

Eagle, Houston. If you have time, pitch 162, yaw minus 16.

You load the REFSMMAT? Okay.

Eagle, Columbia. Your Y dot is minus 1.0. Over.

Mike, you're ...

Eagle, do you read Columbia? Over.

Eagle, this is Columbia. Over.

Houston, Columbia. Over.

Roger, Columbia. Loud and clear now. This is Houston.



Roger. Would you tell Eagle his Y dot is minus 1.0. Over.

Roger. Eagle, Columbia says your Y dot is minus 1.0. Over.

Roger, Houston. We got that. Thank you.

Roger. And you can go high bit rate now. Eagle can.

Eagle, Columbia. How do you read?

AGS agrees very closely, and pointing ...

Houston, Columbia is unable to read Eagle on either antenna or on VHF duplex Bravo. You got any suggestions?

Roger. Columbia, we understand. You are unable to read Eagle. Stand by.

Houston, tell Columbia that we read him about strength 2.

Okay. Wide deadband on.

Houston, Columbia. Also my VHF ranging is not working now, and I'd like to know whether you'd like me to continue making sextant marks or do nothing. I'm supposed to be doing VHF marks only, and it's for the next 6 or 7 minutes.

Columbia, Houston. Roger. We copy. And, Eagle, looks like the best antenna would be forward for the LM. And, break. Eagle, we missed your loading of the TPI TIG and P32. Could you confirm you've done that?

Columbia, Houston. Recommend you take sextant marks and do not reinitialize. Over.

Roger, Houston. Columbia's got the VHF ranging back now. I'll stick with the nominal. Thank you.



Roger. Mighty fine.

Columbia reading you loud and clear now, Eagle.

Columbia, Houston.

Go ahead, Houston.

Roger. Mike, you can go ahead and get as many VHF and sextant marks as you can here in this period of time.

Roger. I've just got time for maybe two sextant marks, then get on with the final count.

Eagle and Columbia, about 1 minute till LOS there on Columbia. It looks like we have about 51.5 for CSI, and we tend to confirm your Y dot. And, break. For Eagle, verify VHF Bravo transmitter is off.

Roger. VHF Bravo is off.

Eagle, Houston. Recommend aft OMNI and are you GO for CSI, so we can let Columbia know. Over.

Roger. We're GO for CSI.

Columbia, Houston. Did you copy? Eagle is GO for CSI.

No, I did not copy. I'm reading them only intermittently, but thank you.

Roger.

Eagle, Houston. We'll see you coming around the other side. Your AOS time - is 1 minute ahead of the flight plan.

Okay. Thank you.



BEGIN LUNAR REV 26

Columbia, Houston. Heard you talked to Eagle? I assume you have COMM with Eagle now?

Houston, Columbia. Over.

Houston, Columbia in OMNI D Delta. Over.

Houston, Columbia. Over.

Columbia, Houston. You're very weak. Say again.

Roger. Houston, Columbia. CSI nominal; no plane change. Everything's going beautifully, and the LM seems to be ...your laser...

Columbia, Houston. You're about one by, I could just barely make you out. I can't understand.

Houston, Columbia. How now?

Houston, Columbia. Over.

Houston, Columbia. Over.

Houston, Columbia. Over.

Houston, this is Eagle. Over.

Hey, Eagle. Houston loud and clear. Columbia was very weak. We were unable to read him.

Roger. We saw you come up over the horizon and it looks like you had a laser operating. Could you confirm that?

Eagle, Houston. Stand by. We'll check it. And, Eagle, Houston. Can you give us a burn report?



Roger. Stand by.

Okay. The CSI burn was on scheduled time of 125 19 3470, 51.5 feet per second was our solution. After chasing residuals a little bit, we ended up with a minus 0.2, plus 0.7, and minus 0.1. And in the AGS, at that time, we had plus 0.4, plus 0.9, and plus 0.3.

Eagle - Eagle, Houston. We copy. Any plane change? Over.

No. There was no plane change on CSI, and CSM had a 2.3 foot per second burn. We had a 2.9, and we elected to postpone that. Over.

Roger. We copy, Eagle. Thank you.

Houston, how do you read Columbia now?

Eagle, how about asking them for some high gain angles for me, will you, please?

Roger, Houston, do you have some high gain angles for Columbia? Over.

Roger, Eagle. And, Columbia, stand by. We'll have them for you shortly.

Eagle, Houston. Could you verify you switched lithium hydroxide canisters? Over.

That's affirmative. We started getting an erratic indication on primary, so we switched to secondary, and it was again erratic and I thought it might have been a sensor. But it's settled down now, and we're on the secondary. Over.

Roger. We copy. Mighty fine.

Columbia and Eagle. Request OMNI Delta for Columbia.

Roger, Houston. I've been in Delta the whole time but it doesn't ...

Houston. Columbia's been on Delta, but he hasn't had much luck with you.

Eagle, Houston. Roger. We copy.



Eagle, are you ready to copy your Y dot?

Go ahead.

***

Eagle, Houston. At your convenience, we'd like to go ahead and try your lithium hydroxides on the primary and let us take a look at it down here.

Columbia, Houston. Over.

Go ahead, Houston. ***

Houston, Eagle. Columbia's been reading you loud and clear on his OMNI's, but he hasn't had any luck in transmitting to you.

Roger, Eagle. Mighty fine. We don't hear Columbia though.

Okay.

We're burning ours, Mike. Minus 1.8.

Eagle, Houston. ...

Columbia, Houston. ...

Columbia, Houston. Over.

Columbia, Houston. You can go ahead and go to REACQ in the high gain. We should get you then.

Do you have some angles for him, Houston?

Roger. Pitch minus 30, yaw 180, for Columbia.

Okay. And what was your CSI - CDH solution, Mike?

***

Roger. Copy. Thank you.

And, Houston, Eagle. Got an ECS light - a CO2 light. Partial pressure's reading about one half millimeter.

Eagle and Columbia, Houston. Roger. We copy.

Houston, how do you read Columbia?

Columbia, Houston. Go.

Eagle, Houston. We're sure that's a sensor problem. You can leave it on PRIMARY.

Okay.

Roger. We pulled the circuit breakers.

Roger, Eagle.

And our water separator apparently isn't working too well. We're getting a lot of water through the suit loop, and we've changed water separators, but it doesn't seem to have improved the situation any.

Eagle, Houston. Roger. We copy.

Eagle, Columbia. Standing by to back you up on the burn. Just let me know how it's going.

Okay.

Okay. You want to know what our NOUN 81 is?

Ready to copy.

Okay. I think you already got the burn time; minus 8.1, minus 1.8, minus 18.2.

Okay, that's pretty close agreement. And, for burn time, I still have 126 17 46.

Roger.

Eagle, Houston. For warm feeling, we are agreeing with your CDH.

Congratulations.

Unfortunately, the chart doesn't agree with it, because the range rate at 36 minutes was off the chart.

Thirty seconds.

We're ready to burn.

Okay.

Yes. I'm ready. ...

Burn complete?

Burn complete.

Thank you.

Eagle, Houston. When you get a chance, are your LCG's hooked up? And if so, what does the LCG accumulator show?

Eagle, Columbia. Passing over the Landing Site. It sure is great to look down there and not see you.

Eagle, Houston.

Go ahead.



Roger. Did you copy on the LCG, there, and the reading on the water accumulator?

Yes. Roger. I did. I'm getting ...

Houston, the water accumulator is right on the line between the red and the green. Over.

Eagle, Houston. Roger. We copy.

Eagle, Houston.

Houston, Eagle.

Roger. On the water problem, we can't add anything more to it, except the fact that it looks like the water accumulators are up to speed to us down here.

Okay. It's not going to be too much trouble.

Roger. Fine.

It's just in one suit, too, for some reason.

Columbia, Houston. Our COMM problem was traced to a ground station here.

Okay. Glad to hear it.

Roger. You're mighty fine now.

Range rate at 30.

I have a TPI TIG when you guys want to compare them.

Stand by.

... 19.8.

Go ahead, Mike. What have you got?



127 02 3450.

You're about 32 seconds *** than we are.

Okay, fine.

***

SC
*** and I'll do it.

*** want to get another *** data update ***

Mark it *** range.

Mark.

Range rate at 40.

Buzz, I would like to confirm that your TPI TIG is 127 02 02. Over.

We haven't settled on a final one yet. The last one was - stand by.

Roger. Understand.

Just as soon as you know what TPI TIG is going to be, I would appreciate a call.

Okay.

Last I got was 32 seconds earlier than mine which would make it 127 02 02.

Thank you. Are you going to be revising that one?

I think probably so. How late - How late can you take a revision?

Well, to stay on my time line, I should have it in the next couple of minutes.

Okay. Latest estimate, 127 03 39.

Thank you kindly,

Eagle, Houston.

Roger. Go ahead.

Roger. In the event of the possibility that we may have had some water channeling in those hydroxide canisters, we recommend you stay in the cabin mode from now on. Over.

Roger.

Eagle, Houston.

Go ahead.

Roger. I'd better clarify that cabin mode a little bit there. What we mean is you go ahead and stay in the cabin mode. Helmets and gloves on are your option. And we really have no concern with the CO2. Over.

Roger. Understand.

Mike, you already loaded that time? We've got a final one here.

I've already loaded it. I don't think it'll make much difference.

Roger. Only 9 seconds difference.

MARKS next.

Columbia, Houston.

Columbia. Go ahead.

Roger, Mike. You can go ahead and arm your logic anytime you want to, and we'll give you a GO so that you can get your PYRO ARM at your convenience.

That's a good idea, babe. You standing by to watch the logic?

Affirmative. Give us a Mark.

MARK LOGIC 1.

MARK LOGIC 2.

Columbia, Houston. We need the SEQ ARM circuit breakers closed.

Okay. Going in SEQ ARM BATT A, and BATT B.

Columbia, Houston. Logic looks good. You can arm your PYRO's at your convenience.

Thank you.

Eagle, Columbia's starting to maneuver to TPI attitude.

Okay.



Eagle and Columbia, Houston. All your solutions look good to us. Out.

And, Mike, if you want our target DELTA V, I'll give it to you.

Ready to copy.

127 03 3082, plus 22.7, plus 1.7, minus 10.6. Over.

127 03 3082, plus 22.7, plus 1.7, minus 10.6. Thank you.

I'm showing a good bit of out of plane velocity on my cross pointers, Mike.

Roger. I have no indication of it.

Coming up on 1 minute to TIG, Neil. How's it looking?

Pretty good.

Good.

That out of plane was in the AGS, not in the radar.

Roger that.

We're burning.

That a boy!

Burn complete?

Read burn complete.

Roger. Thank you.



Eagle, Houston. Aft OMNI, low bit rate, an we'll see you at 127 plus 51.

BEGIN LUNAR REV 27

Okay. You've got me.

Eagle and Columbia, Houston. Standing by.

Roger. We're stationkeeping.

Roger.

Okay, Mike. I'll get - try to get in position here, then you got it.

How does the roll attitude look?

I'll stop. Matter of fact, I can stop right here if you like that.

Eagle, Houston. Middle gimbal. And you might pass to Columbia, we don't have him yet.

That's right.

I'm not going to do a thing, Mike. I'm just letting her hold in ATTITUDE HOLD.

Okay.

You ...

Okay.

Okay. We're all yours. Roger.

Okay. Okay, I have thrusters B3 and C4 safetied.

Okay.

I'm pumping up cabin pressure.



That was a funny one. You know, I didn't feel it shock, and I thought things were pretty steady. I went to RETRACT there, and that's when all hell broke loose. Were you guys - did it appear to you to be - that you were jerking around quite a bit during the retrack cycle?

Yes. It seemed to happen at the time I put the plus X thrust to it, and apparently it wasn't centered, because somehow or other I accidentally got off in attitude and then the attitude hold system started firing.

Yes. I was sure busy there for a couple of seconds.

Are you hearing me all right? I got a horrible squeal.

Yes. I agree with that, but we hear you okay. Over.

Houston, Apollo 11. Over.

Apollo 11, Houston. Go.

Roger. I'm supposed to adjust the oxygen flow in this thing to six tenths of a pound per hour, but being as how this transducer is not working right, could you give me an updated number?

Affirmative. You want to go ahead and adjust your O2 flow until it just goes off the peg, and then crank the direct O2 valve back down about 5 degrees. Over.

Boy, you were really waiting for that one, weren't you? Okay, Ron. Thank you.

Houston, I did that, and I believe we are flowing oxygen, but the gage is just pegged FULL SCALE LOW.

Roger. That's fine. That's what we expect.

Okay.

Okay. I'm going to go ahead with the tunnel leak check.

Columbia, Houston. I have a new LM weight for you whenever you're ready to copy.



Not right now, Ron. Remind me of it later, would you please?

Roger. We'll stand by.

Houston, Apollo 11. I let P47 run longer than I should. I may have deteriorated our state vector slightly.

Roger, Apollo 11. That's okay. We'll see later.

Houston, Apollo 11. Go ahead with your DAP up, please.

Roger. Your LM weight, 5785. For an R1 we'd like to have 61102, R2 01111. Use BD roll. Over.

Roger. I'm configured now at ... for BD roll, and I have thrusters C4 and B3 turned off, and I copy register 1 61102 01111 and LM weight 5785. Thank you.

Roger, Columbia.

Houston, Columbia has completed the leak check, and proceeding with opening the hatch dump valve.

Roger, Columbia. Understand you're doing the leak check. I missed anything after that.

I say the leak check is complete, and I'm proceeding with opening the hatch dump valve.

Eagle - Columbia, Roger.

Eagle, Columbia.

Go ahead.

My hatch is removed. You can open yours, and I'll start passing stuff up to you.

Okay.

No. Stand by one, first.

Okay.

Mike, you ...

Yes, everything is going fine. Be with you in just a second.

Eagle, Houston. Over.

Go ahead, Houston, Eagle here.

Roger. Any time prior to jettison there, we'd like an AGS to PGNS align: 400 plus 30 000. Over.

Okay. Any particular attitude you would like the PGNS in when we do that?

No. We're not getting any. Could you give us some course align gimbal angles to move the PGNS to, and then we will align the AGS to the PGNS. Over.

Roger. Eagle. We concur. Stand by on the gimbal angles. And also, Eagle, while we've got the command module direct O2 on there, there's a possibility that your cabin relief might relieve if we get up around cabin pressure of about 5.4 or 5.5.

Roger.

Eagle, Houston.

Roger. Go ahead.

Roger. All we are trying to do is get PGNS and AGS aligned together. Doesn't make any difference on the gimbal angle.

Okay. We are pretty close to 000. Is that all right?

Eagle, that's beautiful.

Now, you might want to take into account what will happen when the CSM maneuvers to jettison attitude.



Eagle, Houston. We don't care what - All we are trying to do is get a drift rate and see how long it takes them to drift apart on the thing after you jettison.

Okay. Will we be jettisoning at about this attitude? That's okay. I'll align the AGS with the PGNS. You can tell me a little later if you need some help.

Eagle, Houston. That's fine.

Houston, Columbia. You want me to roll over and get high gain or anything like that?

Columbia, Houston. I can give you some REACQ angles for the high gain on the LM jettison attitude. Then you can go there whenever you want to. The angles are pitch minus 50, and yaw zero.

Okay.

Houston, Columbia. Say again the jettison roll, pitch, and yaw, please.

Columbia, Houston. Roll zero, pitch 025, and yaw zero. Over.

Roger. Understand roll zero, pitch 025, yaw zero.

That's affirmative.

... in progress. We've moving. Houston.

Houston, Eagle. Over.

Eagle, Houston. Go.

Roger. It doesn't appear as though the red hose is going to be much of a competitor to the leading vacuum cleaner brands. Over.

There's a little noise there, Buzz. Say again.

Eagle, Houston.

Roger. Go ahead.

Roger. Just a reminder to be sure to zero the AGS errors before you enable the AGS attitude hold there after you get in burn attitude.



Roger. You mean SEP attitude?

Houston, how do you read Columbia on high gain now?

Hey, Columbia. Houston. Mighty fine; loud and clear.

Same here, Ron. Thanks.

And Eagle, Houston. Your steerable antenna angles for jettison attitude are - Over.

Roger. Go ahead.

Roger. Pitch 165, yaw 68. Over.

Roger. Pitch 165, yaw 68.

Eagle, Houston. Correct.

Columbia, Houston.

Columbia. Go ahead.

Roger, Mike. You want to tweak the O2 flow up just a bit there?

Okay. Coming up. Houston, do you have any preferences as to what you want us to do with the probe? Over.

Columbia, Houston. Stand by one.

Okay. Eagle says they've got a place for it inside there, so no problem.

Roger. That's all we were assuming.

Eagle, Houston.

Eagle. Go ahead.

Roger. Neil, it looks like your steerable's good. You can put your track mode to slew and high bit rate, please. Over.

Okay. Track mode to slew and high bit rate.

Okay. Stand by just one, please.



Okay. Shoot them on down.

Eagle, Houston.

Go ahead, Houston.

Roger. Neil, just a reminder again, the ACA out of detent to zero; the AGS out of there just in case you go to ATTITUDE HOLD shortly.

Okay.

You say you wanted the probe now?

Eagle, Houston.

Houston, Eagle. Go ahead.

Roger. That ACA out of detent didn't quite do it because the mode control switches were off. Request guidance control to PGNS and then back to AGS, and that will zero the AGS, there. Over.

Say again, please.

Roger. Request guidance control switch to PGNS and then back to AGS. Over.

Okay. We still have both mode control switches off. Over.

That's okay. That's good.

And I thought I'd just take about 5 seconds here and see if I could get 000 gone, since we're fairly close to gimbal lock right now.

Eagle, Houston. That's fine.

Columbia and Eagle, Houston. About 5 minutes to LOS. Your LM jet time will be 131 plus 52, and I have the rest of the maneuver PAD if you want it now, or I can give it to you on the next time around.

Stand by one.

Could you read it around the next time around, please?

Sure, Mike. That's fine. We'll get it to you then.



Apollo 11, Houston. About a minute and a half to LOS. You're looking great. It's been a mighty fine day.

Boy, you're not kidding.

BEGIN LUNAR REV 28

Hello, Eagle. Houston. Do you read? Over.

Houston, this is Columbia. Reading you loud and clear. We're all three back inside; the hatch is installed. We're running a pressure check leak check. Everything's going well.

Roger, Eagle. Correction - Roger, Columbia. We copy. You guys are speedy; you beat us to the punch. We had a couple of things for you.

What are they?

Oh, it was just - We wanted you to close the CO2 sensor breaker and give us an RCS onboard readout out of Eagle, but that's all. Columbia, Houston. We've got a state vector for you if you'll give us P00 in ACCEPT. Over.

Buzz says the CO2 sensor circuit breaker is IN

Roger. Thank you very much.

The RCS quantity was approximately 60 at A and 45 percent at B.

Roger.

And we're going P00 in ACCEPT.

Roger. Thank you.

Columbia, Houston. Your friendly White Team's going to be on till we get you on the way home, and we'd like to congratulate everybody on a successful rendezvous and a beautiful EVA. It was a great show for everybody. Over.

Thank you, sir. I'll tell Neil and Buzz.



Houston, the hatch passes its integrity check. I'm going to go to LM tunnel VENT now, and leave it there.

Roger, Colualbia. We copy. That's good, and we'd like a readout on the TEP of about the time you - that Eagle selected the secondary loop. Over.

Stand by.

Hello, Columbia. Houston. We got the load in. You can do the VERB 66 and the computer is yours. Over.

Roger.

Houston, Apollo 11. I'd say that the secondary loop was actuated about 15 to 20 minutes ago. Over.

Roger. Copy. Columbia. Thank you very much.

Columbia, Houston. It looks like you guys are so speedy on us that we're thinking about moving up jettison time to about a GET of 130 plus 30, if that's okay with you all. Over.

That's fine. I've still got to get a P30 PAD from you.

Roger. We want to talk to you about that. Mike, we can - for your druthers, we can do it either way. We can either let you do it in the jettison in P30 - correction P47, or we can send you a P30 target load up and then you - let you call P41, whichever you want to do. Over.

Yes, I see. Ron was going to give me a P30 PAD and the flight plan says P47. Out of the two, I prefer to go to P30, P41 route.

Roger. Beautiful. We've got the load. If you'll give us P00 and ACCEPT, we'll send you a load up. Stand by.

Columbia, Houston. We'd like you to terminate direct O2 flow, and stand by on your P00 and ACCEPT. We'll have to generate a new load due to the moveup on time. Over.

Roger.

Columbia, Houston. Over.

Go ahead.

Roger, Mike. It looks like if we move up this jettison time and give you a new load, it would require a new attitude, and we can't do that due to the LM already closed out, and it would fight us all the way around and we'd lose COMM with it. We're thinking separating in P47 in about 10 minutes. We're looking at trajectories and we'll be right with you momentarily. Over.

Okay. It's no big thing with me either way.

Roger.

Hello, Columbia. Houston. We'd like you to start down your jettison checklist. We recommend

Columbia, Houston. Don't try to chase it, just hold what you've got.

Charlie, did it hold cabin pressure this time?

Say again, Buzz. Over.

Okay. I thrusted back - I thrusted back toward it a little bit, Charlie, and I'm now reading NOUN 83, plus four balls 4, minus four balls 8, and you want me to kill average D. Right?

Stand by. That's affirmative. You can exit P47.

There she goes. It was a good one.

Roger dodger. We got Eagle looking good. It's holding cabin pressure and it picked up about 2 feet per second from that jettison.

I believe that. I can see some cracks on the outer coating around the tunnel. In the thermal protective covering, I don't think it has anything to do with the structure.

Roger.

Hello, Columbia, Houston. We'll have an attitude and a little blip burn for you in about 130 30, so we can separate from Eagle. Over.

That's fine.

Columbia, Houston. Would you start a maneuver to a pitch of 230 for this little tweak burn? Over.

Roger. Pitch 230.

Roger, Mike. And verify track mode in AUTO for the high gain.

We're in REACQ. Is that all right?

Say again. We need AUTO.

Say again. We're in REACQ - AUTO REACQ.

Roger. We need AUTO, please, sir.

Okay. You got it.



Roll zero, pitch 320, yaw zero?

Right now that's what we're looking at. Stand by. We might have you roll so we can keep the high gain. Stand by.

Roger.

Columbia, Houston. Over.

Go ahead.

Roger, Mike

Apollo 11, these days.

Oh, Roger, Apollo 11. We got you going to a posigrade attitude and we want you - this burn will be using minus X thrusters at about 2 or 3 feet per second, and we got a load for you. We'll send it up momentarily. Over.

Okay.

Apollo 11, Houston. Would you give us P00 and ACCEPT? We have a load for you. Over.

You got it.

Roger, Mike. And our pitch attitude's a little wrong here. If you're ready to copy, I'll give you the SEP PAD. Over.

Go ahead. Ready to copy.

Roger. Starting with NOUN 33: 130 30 0000, plus 00020, plus all zeros, plus all zeros. Roll all zeros, pitch 230, yaw zero. NOUN 44 is NA. DELTA-VP 00020, burn time 007, DELTA-VC 00020. We have - The rest of the PAD is NA.

Roger. GET 130 hours 30 minutes, DELTA-VX 2.0, roll zero, pitch 230, yaw zero, DELTA-VC, 2.0.

That's affirmative, Apollo 11. And, Mike, it's similar to the SEP burn prior to flight after the undocking here. And the P41 you should see on register 1 - 2, and then you burn minus X until you read 4. Over.



Apollo 11, Houston. Computer's yours. Over.

Roger, Charlie. We switched our OMNI D - Delta, and I lost that last transmission. Would you say again, please? The thing I'm wondering about specifically is that earlier you said it would be minus X thrusters and the PAD indicates plus X. Do you want me to null that to zero or do you want to add 2 and leave it as a 4?

Roger, Apollo 11. The way we gave it to you in the attitude we're in, it'll be just like the SEP burn that you had yesterday. You'll see - NOUN 85 will give you a plus 2 and then you just burn minus X until you read 4. Over.

Understand.

Apollo 11, Houston. We see you in P41 now. It might take you a couple of minutes to integrate these vectors that we gave you and if you don't make TIG, it's pretty insensitive. You can just let P41 bring you up to TIG, and when you get to zero, you can burn on that. Over.

Okay.

Okay. Burn complete. Residuals: plus three balls 40, plus four balls 7, plus four balls 2, DELTA-V counter 102.1. Over.

Copy, Apollo 11. Looks good to us. Over.

Okay.

Houston, Apollo 11. How about coming up with a good communications attitude for us to go to between now and the time we maneuver at TEI attitude.

Roger, sir. Stand by.

Hello, Apollo 11, Houston. A couple of things for you. Over.

Go ahead.

Okay. Mike, you can maneuver to your preliminary TEI attitude as shown on page 398 of the flight plan, and the high gain angles are good as shown in the flight plan, and we'd like you to dump the waste water at 131 05 down to 10 percent. Over.



Okay. Understand. I'm going to go to roll 1.1, pitch zero - or 52.6, and yaw 13.8, and you want a waste water dump 10 percent starting at 131 05.

That's affirmative. Right out the LOS.

Maneuver is in progress, Houston.

Copy, 11. Out.

Apollo 11, Houston. Over.

Apollo 11 under high gain. How do you read?

Five by, 11. How me? Over.

You're loud and clear, Charlie. What - What numbers are you looking at for TEI TIG preliminary; 135 hours 23 minutes, something like that?

That's affirmative, Mike. We're looking at about nominal time. We've considered kicking it up a REV, but we don't think this REV track is going to be any good since we had the RCS burn and we need some more tracking to get you a good TEI. Over.

That's what we're looking for.

Roger.

11, Houston. Looks like it's going to be pretty relaxed time here for the next couple of hours. We'll have you a PAD, of course, the next REV or so, and we'll keep you posted on TEI. Looks like nominal time. Over.

Thank you, Charlie.

And your little maneuver back here a moment ago will put you about 20 miles ahead of the LM at TEI.

Okay.

Imagine that place has cleared out a little bit after that rendezvous. You can find a place to sit down almost, huh?

Roger. Our MOCR's about empty right now. We're taking it a little easy. How does it feel up there to have some company?



Damn good, I'll tell you.

I'll bet. I bet, you'd almost be talking to yourself up there after 10 REVS or so.

No, no. It's a happy home here. It'd be nice to have company. As a matter of fact, it'd be nice to have a couple of hundred million Americans up here.

Roger. Well, they were with you in spirit.

Let them see what they're getting for their money.

Roger. Well, they were with you in spirit anyway, at least that many. We heard on the news today, 11, that last night - yesterday after you made your landing, New York Times came out with a - headlines, the largest headlines they've ever used in the history of the newspaper.

Save us a copy.

I'm glad to hear it was fit to print.

It was great.

That's why we didn't read you up any newscast. There really wasn't anything to talk about.

Hello, there, Boss.

Apollo 11, Houston. We've got 10 minutes to LOS; see you over the hill at 131 48. Over.

Okay, Charlie. I'll dump the water as soon as we go around the corner.

Roger. Everything's looking real good now.

Yes. Same here.

Hello, Apollo 11. Houston. Coming up about 4 30 LOS. You're looking great on all your systems. Eagle is purring right along after an hour 30 without any cooling. The PNGS is still looking good. Over.

Roger.

Apollo 11, Houston. Will you verify that your rendezvous radar transponder is off? Over.

It's not, but I'll get it off.

Roger. We were seeing - believe it or not, we were seeing some funnies on the Eagle's rendezvous radar, and that was the only theory that we had. It looked like it was a good one.

Good theory.

Hello, Apollo 11. Houston. We are standing by. Everything is looking great here. Over.

Apollo 11. Roger.

Hello, Apollo 11. Houston. If you guys want it, we've got some news, here, we can read up. Over.

Be pleased to have it.

Roger, Neil. Starting off: Congratulatory messages on the Apollo 11 mission have been pouring into the White House from world leaders in a steady stream all day. Among the latest are telegrams from Prime Minister Harold Wilson of Great Britain and the King of Belgium. The world's press has been dominated by news of Apollo 11. Some newsmen estimate that more than 60 percent of the news used in papers across the country today concerned your mission. The New York Times which, as we mentioned before, has had such a demand for its edition of the paper today (even though it ran 950 000 copies) said it will reprint the whole thing on Thursday as a souvenir edition. And Premier Alexei Kosygin has sent congratulations to you and President Nixon through former Vice President Humphrey who is visiting Russia. The cosmonauts have also issued a statement of congratulations. Humphrey quoted Kosygin as saying "I want you to tell the President and the American people that the Soviet Union desires to work with the United States in the cause of peace."

And Mrs. Robert Goddard said today that her husband would have been so happy. "He wouldn't have shouted or anything. He would just have glowed." She added, "That was his dream, sending a rocket to the Moon." People around the world had many reasons to be happy about the Apollo 11 mission. The Italian police reported that Sunday night was the most crime free night of the year. And in London, a boy who had the faith to bet $5 with a bookie that a man would reach the Moon before 1970 collected $24.000. That's pretty good odds.



You're probably interested in the comments your wives have made. Neil, Jan had said about yesterday's activities, "The evening was unbelievably perfect. It is an honor and a privilege to share with my husband, the crew, the Manned Spacecraft Center, the American public, and all mankind; the magnificent experience of the beginning of lunar exploration." She was then asked if she considered the Moon landing the greatest moment in her life. She said "No, that was the day we were married." And Mike, Pat said simply, "It was fantastically marvelous." Buzz, Joan said - apparently couldn't quite believe the EVA on the Moon. She said, "It was hard to think it was real until the men actually moved. After the Moon touchdown, I wept because I was so happy." But she added, "The best part of the mission will be the splashdown."

In other news, and there was a little bit, another explorer: Thor Heyerdahl had to give up his attempt to sail a papyrus boat across the Atlantic. The storm damaged boat was abandoned about 650 miles from Bermuda. The speed of the craft had been reduced to about 25 miles a day, and Heyerdahl said the object of the voyage had not been to provide an endurance test for the crew.

Looking at the world of sports, let's see here. While you were busy the other day, Joe Namath and football Commissioner Pete Rozelle made the announcement that "Broadway Joe" had agreed to sell his interest in the Bachelors III restaurant and report to the New York Jets. Joe arrived at the Jets' training camp today and had his first workout. Several other Jet players who had held out along with Joe also reported. And Davy Hill, from Jackson, Michigan, won his third major golf in as many starts in the past week. He won the Philadelphia Classic. Hill has won four tournaments so far this year and is the leading money winner this year with a cool $129.000. And in baseball, the west division of the National League remains a tight race. LA and San Francisco are one game behind league leading Atlanta. The Astros have a record of 48 wins and 48 losses, and are now in fifth place, seven games out. A twin bill between the Astros and Cincinnati last night was postponed because of rain. The Chicago Cubs



are still in first place in the East Division. They lead the New York Mets by four and one half games. And in the American League, Baltimore is breezing toward the Eastern Division title. They lead second place Boston by 11 games. Looking ahead, the All Star baseball game is scheduled for tomorrow. And President Nixon was scheduled to see the game and then leave immediately after the game for the Pacific splashdown area before going on his tour of Europe. And that about covers the news this day. You guys have been making most of it and I'm sure we couldn't fill you in on any of the details that you don't already know. Out.

Thank you much, Charlie.

You're welcome.

11, Houston. We've got a preliminary TEI 30 PAD, if you're ready to copy.

Ready to copy.

Roger. Coming at you. TEI 30, SPS/G&amp;N: 36691; minus 061, plus 067 135 23 4149; NOUN 81, plus 32020, plus 06713, minus 02773 181 054 013; NOUN 44, HA is NA, plus 00230 32833 228, DELTA VC 32625 24 1510 355. Next three lines are NA. NOUN 61 plus 1103, minus - minus 17237 11806 36275 195 04 52. Your set stars are Deneb and Vega, 242 172 012. We like two jet ullage to 16 seconds. The horizon will be on the 11 degree mark at TIG minus 2 minutes. And other comments: your sextant star is visible after GET of 134 50. Ready for your readback. Over.

Roger. We have a TEI 30, SPS/G&amp;N: 36691, minus 061, plus 067 135 23 4149; plus 32020, plus 06713, minus 02773 181 054 013; NA, plus 00230, plus 32833 228 32625, 24 1510 355; NA three times, plus 1103, minus 17237 11806 36275 195 04 52. Deneb and Vega 242 172 012, two jet ullage, 16 seconds; horizon 11 degree line at TIG minus 2 minutes; sextant star visible after 134 50. Over.

Roger, Mike. Good readbaek. Out.



Hello, Apollo 11. Houston. Seven minutes to LOS; next AOS 133 46. You're looking good going over the hill. Out.

Hello, Apollo 11. Houston. We're standing by.

Roger. Apollo 11.

Roger. We'd like you, sometime at your convenience, to stir up the CRYO's on this pass. And we're wondering if you got the fuel cell purge. Over.

Roger. *** fuel cell purge ...

Say again. You're breaking up.

Roger. The O2 fuel cell purge is complete.

Roger. Copy.

Hello, Apollo 11, Houston. We've got a load for you, if you give us P00 and ACCEPT. The load consists of a CSM pre TEI state vector that's going in the CSM slot, and a post-TEI state vector that'll go into the LM slot, if that's okay; and also a TEI target load. Any comments? Over.

Very good. Thank you very much.

Yes, sir.

P00 and ACCEPT. You got it.

Thank you.

And, 11, Houston. A reminder: you can scratch the VERB 66 at 134 30.

Understand.

And, 11, Houston. For your information, Eagle, we had an ISS fail light came on at about 3 19 due to a CDU overheating; and at about this time at AOS it looks like we're about to lose the platform.

Apollo 11, Houston. We got the load in. You can have the computer

11. Are you through with the computer?

That's affirmative, Buzz.

All right. That's timing for you.

And, Apollo 11, Houston. Your friendly White Team has your coming home information, if you're ready to copy. Over.

Stand by.

Apollo 11. Ready to copy.

Roger, 11. Got two PADS for you, TEI 30 and then a TEI 31. TEI 30 SPS/G&amp;N: 36691, minus 061, plus 066 135 23 4156. NOUN 81: 32 - correction, plus 32011, plus 06818, minus 02650 181 054 014. Apogee is NA, perigee plus 00230 3286 - correction, 32836; burn time 2 28 32628 24 1511 357. Next three lines are NA. NOUN 61: plus 1103, minus 17237 11806 36275 195 04 52. Set stars are Deneb and Vega, 242 172 012. We'd like ullage from two jets for 16 seconds, and the horizon is on the 10 degree line at TIG minus 2 minutes; and your sextant star is visible after 134 plus 50. Stand by on your readback. I have a TEI 31 if you're ready to copy. Over.

Roger. TEI 30, SPS/G&amp;N: 36691, minus 061, plus 066 135 23 4156, plus 32011, plus 06 818, minus 02650, 181 054 014; apogee NA, plus 00230 32836 228 32628 42 1511 357, NA three lines, plus 1103, minus 17237 11806 36275 195 04 52, Deneb and Vega, 242 172 012, two jet ullage, 16 seconds, horizon out of the window, 10 degrees, TIG minus 2 minutes, sextant star at 134 10. Over.

Roger, Buzz. Good readback. You're very weak. If you're ready to copy, I got a TEI 31 for you. Over.

All right. Go ahead.

Apollo 11, Houston. You were cut out. Say again.



Roger. Stand by one.

Roger.

All right. Go ahead. I'm ready to copy.

Roger, 11. TEI 31, SPS/G&amp;N: 36691, minus 061, plus 066 137 22 3985, plus 32838, plus 06845, minus 02487, NA, pitch 052. Rest of the PAD is NA. Ready for your readback. Over.

Roger. TEI 31, SPS/G&amp;N: 36691 minus 061, plus 066, 137 22 3985, plus 32838, plus 06845, minus 02487, NA, pitch 052. The rest is NA. Over.

Roger. Good readback. And, Buzz, did you say sextant star is visible after 134 50?

No. I wrote down 134 10. I wasn't real sure about that.

Roger. It went by me there. RETRO caught it. It's 134 50. Over.

Okay. 134 50. Thank you.

Yes, sir.

Hello, Apollo 11. Houston. After the burn, we'd like you to trim X and Z. Over.

Okay, Charlie.

Roger. And that's to 0.2 foot per second, as shown in the flight plan.

Sounds like there's a story behind that one, too.

We'll tell you when you get back.

Hello, Apollo 11. Houston. Would you verify that you've stirred up the CRYO's? Over.

Roger. We've stirred them up.

Thank you, sir.

Apollo 11, Houston. You are GO for TEI. Over.

Apollo 11. Thank you.

Hello, Apollo 11. Houston. You've got about 8 minutes till LOS. Your AOS with the burn, 135 34 05, no burn 135 44. Over.

Okay. Thank you.

Yes, sir.

Apollo 11, Houston. One minute to LOS. Go sic 'em.

Thank you, sir. We'll do it.

BEGIN LUNAR REV 31

Hello Apollo 11. Houston. How did it go? Over.

Time to open up the LRL doors, Charlie.

Roger. We got you coming home. It's well stocked.

Okay, Burn status: DELTA-TIG was zero, burn time was 2 plus 30. PAD angles: DELTA VGX after trim was 0.1, VGY 0.9, VGZ 0.1. DELTA-VC minus 17.9, fuel 10.6, OX 10.4, unbalance minus 50.

Roger. Copy, Neil. Sounds good to us.

And Apollo 11, Houston. All your systems look real good to us. We'll keep you posted.

Roger.

Hey, Charlie boy, looking good here. That was a beautiful burn. They don't come any finer.

Roger.



Apollo 11, Houston. I wondered if you've compared your state vector accuracy with the one in the LM flights? Over.

Yes, sir, and it looked very nice. VERB 83 was plus 00070 and minus 00008.

Roger.

11, Houston. I was looking at your bank Bravo nitrogen tank. It didn't leak a bit - correction - didn't leak a bit this time. Over.

Roger. Looked good here.

Chamber pressure was hanging in there around 100. The latter part, of the burn it started oscillating a little bit and got down a little bit below 100.

Roger.

96 or so.

Roger.

Apollo 11, Houston. Would you give us P00 in ACCEPT? We've got a REFSMMAT for you. Over.

Okay.

Thank you.

Hello, Apollo 11. Houston. We've got the load in. You can go back to BLOCK. Over.

We're there.

Roger.

Your command module film seems to be working out pretty well, Charlie, the amount we carried. Looks like we carried just about what we needed.

Wonderful.

We have one 16 millimeter roll on the ASA 1000 color interior film. We were thinking of shooting that during the entry, out window number 4 on a bracket, and you might get the camera guide sometime in the next couple of days and give us all the good settings for that.



Roger.

Hello, Apollo 11. Houston. I wondered if during the TEI burn you utilized the oxidizer flow valve on the PUGS. Over.

Yes, we did. Based on your very excellent briefing I was expecting the thing to continue desiring increase for the whole time, so we started out with it in INCREASE. I saw that we pretty quickly crossed the line and started falling about 6 or 7 percent behind, so I was still expecting it to move up, and then I went down to FULL DECREASE and brought it back down to a difference of 2 percent. Over.

Roger. Thank you very much, Buzz.

Two tenths of a percent, I'm sorry.

Roger. Thank you.

Apollo 11, Houston. You can go to PTC attitude and torque at your - and do the P52 and torque at your convenience. Over.

Hey, we got to take some more pictures, Charlie. Is there any constraint, normally, in staying here for awhile?

No, sir.

Thank you.

Go ahead, 11. Over.

How does that tracking look, or is it too early to tell?

Stand by, Mike.

Apollo 11, Houston. FIDO's are looking at the data. It's too early to tell yet exactly. It's looking real good so far. We'll have you some answers shortly on trajectory. Over.

Okay. What FIDO is that?

That's Jay Green.

Howdy, Jay.

11, Houston. We have a DAP CSM update for you.

Go ahead.

Roger. CSM weight, Mike: 26370. Over.

Thank you, sir.

Welcome.

Apollo 11, Houston. We've taken your onboard vector and propagated it forward, and it's looking real good. We only got about 24 minutes of tracking now. Really too early to tell on the radar. Over.

Roger. Understand.

Hello, Apollo 11. Houston. Mike, did you notice any transients at ignition on TEI? Over.

Yes. The transients were more noticeable than on the previous burns, Charlie. I just wrote it off on the fact we had a light command module, but there was considerable roll activity which dampened down after the first 20 seconds, I would guess, of the burn; but then there was also some pitch and yaw activity. I don't believe it was abnormal, and it seemed to be deadbanding ratherly crisply in roll plus or minus about 8 degrees either side of the center line; and after the



first couple of - oh, after the first 20 seconds or so, the gimbals were quiet, and pitch and yaw were relatively quiet. Before that, there was some oscillation but mostly just in rates. Total attitude hung in there pretty well.

Roger. Thank you much. We were looking at the playback, and we saw some things that - right at start up. We'll be back with you later on that.

Okay.

Apollo 11, Houston. Have you finished taking pictures? Over.

We're just finishing up, Charlie.

Roger.

About to get started on the P52 here pretty soon.

Copy.

Another eight or nine of them.

Hello, Apollo 11. Houston. You can crank up on the PTC at any time. Over.

All right-o.

Apollo 11, Houston.

Go ahead, Houston.

Roger, 11. This is the regional CAP COMM. Congratulations on an outstanding job. You guys have really put on a great show up there. I think it's about time you powered down and got a little rest, however. You've had a mighty long day here. Hope you're all going to get a good sleep on the way back. I look forward to seeing you when you get back here. Don't fraternize with any of those bugs in route except for the Hornet.

Okay. Thank you, boss. We'll - We're looking forward to a little rest and a restful trip back. And see you when we get there.



Roger. You've earned it.

Hello, Apollo 11. Houston. We'd like you to turn off O2 tank number 1 heaters. Over.

It's off. Thank you.

Roger.

Hello, Apollo 11. Houston. For your information, the LGC in Eagle just went belly up at 7 hours. Over.

Okay. Very good, ... death of a real winner, there.

Charlie, we're going to rotate about pitch 270 degrees on the way home vice 1 - or 090 on the way out. Right?

Right, sir.

Okay. VERB 49 maneuver to that attitude is in progress.

Roger.

Houston, crew status report. Radiation: CDR 11017, CMP 10019,LMP 09020. No medication.

Say again, please, Neil. We - you were breaking up. We missed that. Over.

Okay. This is crew status report. Radiation: CDR 11017, CMP 10019, LMP 09020. No medication.

Roger. Thank you.

And we didn't get any crew status report from you this morning. Wondered if you could give us an estimate of sleep last night. Over.

Okay ...

Okay. We'll take a guess, Charlie, and try to give an equivalent amount. Oh, it's CDR 3, and LMP 4.

Roger. Thank you very much.



And, Charlie, you want the fans cycled ... Right?

That's affirmative, and we'd like you to disable quads Charlie and Delta. Over.

Okay. Charlie and Delta.

Apollo 11, Houston. If it's convenient, we'd like to go through your onboard readout. Over.

Of what?

Oh, excuse me. It's on the flight plan, 3102. We'd like BATTS and RCS. Over.

Stand by.

Ready to copy, Houston?

Roger. Go ahead.

BATT Charlie 370, PYRO BATT A 370, BATT B 370; RCS, 55, 65, 64, and 62. Over.

Roger. We copy all that. Thank you much.

Roger.

Apollo 11, Houston. A couple of questions for the Moon walkers, if you got a second. Over.

Go ahead.

Roger, Neil. We're seeing some temperature rises on the passive seismic experiment that are a little higher than normal and were wondering if you could verify the deployed position. We understand it's about 40 feet from the LM in the eleven o'clock position. Over.

No. It's about in the nine or nine thirty position, and I'd say it's about 50 or 60 feet.

Roger. Copy. Also, did you notice - was there any indication of any dust cloud as you lifted off? Over.



Not very much. There was quite a bit of Kapton and parts of the LM that went out in all directions, usually for great distances, as far as I can tell. But I don't remember seeing anything of a dust cloud to speak of.

Roger. Understand all you could see was parts of the LM going out. What was your - your first - first comment? Over.

I don't remember. Just that the Kapton and other parts on the LM staging scattering all around the area for great distances, but I didn't see much dust.

Roger. Thank you very much.

Houston, Apollo 11. Could you keep me honest on the lithium hydroxide changes? When do you have the next one scheduled for?

Stand by.

Apollo 11, Houston. Mike, on that canister, we had you due to change one at 133 before TEI, and it's on page 399. The next one we got is at 147. Over.

Okay.

Hello, Apollo 11, Houston. We'd like to extend our damping period for another 5 minutes; let the rates get way down. Over.

11. Roger.

Houston, Apollo 11.

Go ahead, 11. Over.

Roger, Charlie. Like to bring you up to date on our chlorination status. In compartment B4, we have one, two, three, four, five, six, seven - correction, we have eight pockets for chlorine and buffer ampules, of which - Let me correct that. We have seven pockets, of which one is empty and always has been empty, leaving six remaining. On the other side over there in B7, we have another container with seven pockets, so we have a total of seven plus six, and those are filled with six chlorines and seven buffers. Now, I've been using one chlorine and one buffer per day which, at this point in time, prior to



this chlorination I'm about to do, leaves me one chlorine and two buffers. Seems to me I'm one chlorine short, and that being the case, I'd like to ask your advice on postponing this chlorination using the last container until some later date, like maybe tomorrow. Over.

Roger. We copy, Mike. Stand by.

Okay.

Hello, Apollo 11. Houston. Check in A1, Mike, and see what you can find in there. Over.

We think you might have some more chlorine up in A1. Over.

Hello, Apollo 11. Houston.

Houston, Apollo 11.

Apollo 11, Houston. Do you read? You're breaking up. Over.

Roger. Read.

Roger, 11. You're breaking up. Mike, please look in compartment A1. We think there might be some more chlorine up there. Over.

Eureka!

11, Houston. Reading you about one by. Over.

11, Houston. We're having a downlink problem. That's the reason we can't read you. We're switching sites. Stand by.

Hello, Apollo 11. Houston. How do you read now? Over.

Fine.

Roger. You're five by now, too, Mike. Thank you much. Did you copy that about A1 on that chlorine?

Eureka!

How about that, sports fans!

Apollo 11, Houston. We're having a little trouble getting the yaw rate damped out to the appropriate value. We'd like you all to be quite like mice for a couple of minutes and let's see if that will help it out. Over.

11, Houston. You did great work there. We're ready to spin it up. Over.

11, Houston. Did you copy? Over.

Yes. We read you, Charlie. Would you stand by a minute?

Roger. No hurry.

11, Houston. Shift change time, here. White Team bids you good night; we'll see you tomorrow. Over.

Good night, Charlie. Thank you.

Good night, Charlie. Thank you.

Adios.

Adios. Thanks again for a great show, you guys.

Thanks for a great job down there.

Apollo 11, Houston. Over.



Good morning, Ron.

Howdy there, Mike. We're ready to go ahead and have you switch to your OMNI positions for your sleep period, and we would like the following high gain switch positions: your high gain antenna in MANUAL, beam width WIDE, pitch is minus 50, and yaw is a plus 270. And just follow the flight plan for remaining COMM configuration. Over.

Roger. Out.

You "Purple" people keep funny hours.

Your COMM is pretty weak at this point, Mike. Please say again.

Roger. Disregard.

Houston, Apollo 11.

Go ahead, 11.

It's on the way now.

Apollo 11, Houston. We'd like for you to go ahead and put your S band antenna OMNI to OMNI and OMNI B. Over.

Apollo 11, Houston. How do you read me through Honeysuckle now? Over.

You're loud and clear. Over.

Very good. Reading you better now. And did you copy we'd appreciate going S band OMNI and OMNI B at this time? Over.

That's the configuration we're in.

Okay. Thank you.

I'll say you "Purple" people keep funny hours.

REST PERIOD - NO COMMUNICATIONS

Good afternoon, Houston. Apollo 11. Over.

Good morning, 11. This is Houston. Over.

Okay. Crew status report: 88 and 8.5.

Roger. 88 and 8.5. When you're ready, we've got a small flight plan update for you.

Houston, we're ready to copy.

Roger. At about 148 hours, if you've not already done so, a CO2 filter change, and the H2 purge line heater on 20 minutes before the O2 and H2 purge. At 148 hours, we'd like you to initiate a charge on battery Alfa instead of at 151 hours, and leave the charge on until we notify you further. At 150 hours GET, waste water dump to 10 percent. We do plan to burn midcourse correction 5. It will be an RCS burn about 5 feet per second at about the nominal time in the flight plan. Over.

Roger. Understand. We'll be accomplishing the filter change shortly, the purge line heater is on ***, O2 and H2 purge shortly, and at 148 will initiate a charge on battery A until you notify us further. At 150 hours, waste water dump to 10 percent. And we're looking forward to midcourse correction 5 at about 5 feet per second at the nominal time. Over.

Roger. I've got your consumables update, if you're ready to copy.

Copy.

Okay. At GET of 147 plus 00, RCS total minus 2.0 percent, which is about minus 14 pounds. Alfa minus 12.0, Bravo plus 10.0, minus 3.0, minus 2.0. Hydrogen total minus 1.5 pounds, O2 total plus 20 pounds. Over.

Roger. I copy, and our onboard readouts: Alfa, *** 2 percent, Bravo 54 percent, Cocoa's 64 percent, Delta 61 percent. Over.

Roger, 11. Would you read that quad Alfa again, please, Buzz. You're cutting out. It may be - are you operating on VOX? Over.

Negative. Alfa is 53 percent. Over.

Roger. We copy.

11, from down here on telemetry, all your systems look to be in good shape.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. Over.

Go ahead.

Roger. Would you ask Buzz to check his biomedical TM sensors for a loose or dried out sensor? We're getting an erratic electrocardiogram reading. That would be one of the three sternal leads. Over.

Okay.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. Say again your last, please.

Disregard.

Roger. Out.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. Stand by for a Mark leaving the lunar sphere of influence.

MARK.

You're leaving the lunar sphere of influence. Over.

Roger. Is Bill Shaffer down there?

Negative. But we've got a highly qualified team on in his stead.

Roger. I wanted to hear him explain it again to the press conference.

Okay.

That's old Apollo 8 junk, but tell him the spacecraft gave a little jump as it went through the ...



Okay. I'll pass it on to him. Thanks a lot, and Dave Reed is sort of burying his head in his arms right now.

Roger. Out.

Those guys down there in the press room did a pretty good job this morning.

Yes, they have.

We don't want them to give up yet, though.

No. They'll hang in there for about another 47 hours or so.

Okay.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. If you're not busy now, I can read you up the morning news.

Okay. We're all listening.

Say again, 11?

Roger. We're all listening. Go ahead.

Roger. From the hot wires of the Public Affairs Office: Apollo 11 still dominates the news around the world. Only four nations, Communist China, North Korea, North Viet Nam, and Albania, have not yet informed their citizens of your flight and landing on the Moon. One newsman said that he has run out of ways to describe your success. Tonight, President Nixon is scheduled to watch the All Star baseball game in Washington. After the game, he will depart for the Pacific recovery area. Wednesday evening, he will fly from Johnston Island by helicopter to the Navy communications ship Arlington. Then on Thursday morning, he will reboard the helicopter and fly to the Hornet in time to witness your splashdown. Accompanying the President will be Secretary of State William Rogers and Frank Borman. They will watch the splashdown from the bridge of the recovery ship with Admiral John Sidney McCain, Jr., Commander of the Pacific Forces. Following the President's stay aboard the Hornet, he will depart for his tour of Asia and scheduled visit to Romania. Luna 15 is believed to have crashed into the Sea of Crises yesterday after orbiting the Moon 52 times. The Soviet News Agency TASS reported that "scientific"



"research in near Moon space was carried out." Sir Bernard Lovell at Jodrell Bank Observatory said that Luna 15 hit the surface of the Moon at a speed of about 300 miles per hour. Things have been relatively quiet recently in Viet Nam. GI's on patrol were observed carrying transistor radios tuned into your flight. The Armed Forces radio and TV network in Viet Nam gave the mission full coverage. Skirmishes still continue between the Egyptians and Israelis along the Suez Canal. U.N. observers there are trying to halt the action. In Washington, the House Ways and Means Committee has voted to reduce the 27.5 percent oil depletion allowance to 20 percent. We've had rain several times here in the Houston area. Today it is cloudy, and more showers are expected. On the sports front, as we mentioned earlier, the All Star game is tonight. There were no games played yesterday. Last night in New York, the Baseball Writers Association of America named Babe Ruth the greatest ball player of all time. Joe DiMaggio was named the greatest living ball player. Frank Borman made the announcements at a dinner honoring the players. Joe Namath put in a full day at the New York Jets' training camp. Five policemen had a hard time restraining about 500 kids who wanted to touch Broadway Joe. He said he feels fine and will play in the All Star game August 1, if Coach Weeb Eubank lets him. The Oilers' camp at Kerrville got wet yesterday, but the workouts continued. There have been some minor injuries, but nothing too serious. Coach Wally Lemm is satisfied so far with the workouts. The Oilers are expecting attendance by over 30.000 for the preseason game with Buffalo. Apparently, Don Meredith's announced retirement isn't expected to dampen enthusiasm, especially around here in Houston. Mario Andretti won the 200 mile Trenton Auto Race Sunday and is now the leading race driver in the U.S. Auto Club's point standings. And that's about the summary of the morning news this afternoon in Houston. Over.

Look up the Dow Jones Industrials for us.

Roger. Stand by a minute, please.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. We see you in P00. When you can give us ACCEPT, we have a state vector and target load uplink ready for you.



Roger, Houston. I'm going ahead and start the computer.

Roger. Thank you.

Apollo 11, we've completed the uplink. The computer's yours.

Thank you.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. Over.

Go ahead.

Roger. With respect to the Dow Jones industrials, since closing on Tuesday afternoon the 15th up to about 1:05 p.m. Houston time this afternoon, why, the effect has been a net drop; that is, minus 6 points on the industrial average. So far today since opening, the Dow Jones industrial average has gone down by 11.05 after rising 1 1/2 shortly after opening. Today's performance on the utilities is a drop of 1.63, and railroads a drop of 1.58. Over.

Every flight has to have some disadvantages, I guess.

Roger. There is some speculation that you all are responsible for that 1 1/2 point rise right after opening.

Well, don't blame the 11 point drop on us, anyway.

Roger.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. If you have a minute or so free, I wonder if we could get Mike to give us a little bit of clarification on what happened around about the time of docking. We copied him as mentioning that contact was very smooth, almost imperceptible; and we're a little bit inquisitive or curious about his remarks as to what happened after probe retraction. Over.

Roger. I docked in CMC AUTO, and as I said, I wasn't really sure of the moment of contact. I kept cross checking the docking probe indicators. I got two barber poles indicating that the three capture latches - not capture latches, but the three ... latches had made, and we were soft



docked. And at that time the situation looked very stable. So, I went to CMC FREE, glanced back out the window and it still looked stable; and I fired primary 2 bottle. And at that time, a gyration began between the two vehicles due I'm not sure to what. Perhaps the LM thrusting or perhaps it was building up prior, and I hadn't noticed it. But anyway, during the RETRACT of the probe, there were yaw - my yaw excursions of, I would guess, around 15 degrees, and I had to come back on, take the FREE switch and throw it back to AUTO, and try to damp them out; and I guess Neil was doing the same in the LM. I'll let him tell you about his side of it. And I though that we were not going to get a successful RETRACT and hard dock. However, in about - oh, I guess 6 or 8 seconds, I did hear - could see the situation damping out, and then we heard the noise indicating the docking latches had fired; and later on when I got into the tunnel, all 12 of them had properly engaged.

Roger.

And on the LM side, we were in AGS MIN deadband ATT HOLD; and at contact, I thrusted plus X; and shortly after that we had a sizable attitude oscillation and thruster firing, so we opened up the deadband to MAX and manually flew the vehicle into stable attitude during the retraction. It went to OFF after ...

Roger. Thank you very much. Out.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. I have your midcourse correction 5 PAD available when you're ready to copy.

Stand by.

Houston, Apollo 11. Ready to copy.

11, this is Houston. Midcourse correction number 5, RCS/G&amp;N: 26025, pitch and yaw trim NA, TIG 150 29 5453, minus 00048, plus all balls, plus 00001 075 159 328; HA is NA; HP plus 00230 00048 011 00048; sextant star 03 0908 382. Boresite star block, none available. Latitude plus 1102, minus 17204 11803 36275 195 03 33, GDC align,



Deneb and Vega, 007 144 068, no ullage, of course, four quad thrusting. Over. Readback.

Roger. Midcourse number 5, RCS/G&amp;N: 26025, pitch and yaw NA, 150 29 5453, minus 00048, plus all zeros, plus 00001 075 159 328, NA, plus 00230 00048 011 00048 03 0908 382, NA three times, plus 1102, minus 17204 11803 36275 195 03 33, Deneb and Vega, 007 144 068, and four quads for the burn. Over.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. Readback correct. Out.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. Over.

Roger. Go ahead, Houston.

Roger. If Neil has a free minute, we've got a question or two regarding the CO2 partial pressure and water in the suit loop discrepancies noted yesterday. Over.

Go ahead.

Roger, 11. Was water noted in both suits or only in yours, Neil?

I think only in my suit.

Okay. Can you locate that occurrence for us in time when you first noticed water in the suit, either by mission time or relation to any particular event?

I think it was after insertion sometime, Bruce. I don't remember exactly when. I - It was when we were in orbit and had our - after we took our helmets off.

Roger. Did you call it to us when you first noticed it, or was it sometime after when you called it?

I'd guess it might have been probably 20 minutes after I noticed it that I mentioned it to you.

Roger. Was this noticing the water accompanied by erratic CO2 partial pressure readings, or was that a separate problem? Over.



Well, the water problem evidenced itself before we noted any erratic motions of the PC02 gage.

Roger. And what was the relative sequence on selecting water separator number 2 and the secondary CO2 canister; that is, did you go to the secondary water separator first and then the secondary CO2? Over.

I believe we went to secondary CO2 first.

Secondary hydroxide - lithium hydroxide.

Roger. We copy. And was there any change in your suit loop

No.

Go ahead.

I should mention, Bruce, that when I went to water secondary - water separator to secondary there, I didn't notice any change. But about after 15 minutes or 20 minutes, the water stopped coming out. So maybe that was just water that was already in the loop that was still blowing out, but the secondary water separator was operating properly.

Roger. Did you make any changes in the suit loop configuration after you went from the egress mode to the cabin mode after insertion; that is, in particular, they're interested in knowing if you recall changing the diverter valve position to EGRESS at any time while you were on the secondary canister? Over.

No. I don't believe we did that at all, Bruce.

Okay, 11. Thank you. That sums up our questions for now, and we'll crank these back into the engineering pipeline and see what we can come up with.

Okay. Are you satisfied that the CO2 circuit breaker was in on jettison? Over.

Say again, please?



Roger. On LM jettison, are you satisfied that the CO2 circuit breaker was in? Over.

Yes. It was in.

Roger. Could you confirm that? I thought there was some question after we got into the command module as to whether that had been left in or not. Over.

Roger, 11. It was in and confirmed in, and the readings after jettison stayed about 0.1 to 0.2.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. We have not noticed any change in the signal coming through on the LMP's EKG. When he has a little free time, we'd like him to check into it again. Over.

Roger. I looked at all three of the upper chest center ones, and they appear to be fairly tight. I'll push them back in again. Over.

Roger. On the TM here, we noticed some fluctuations that may have been attributed to your moving the sensors around or pushing on them, but the erratic problem seems to be persisting.

Houston, Apollo 11. Over.

11, this is Houston. Over.

Roger. I wonder if you've noticed any change in the BIOMED returns you're getting. Over.

Negative, Buzz. It still looks kind of bad. Apparently, when you move around, it's cutting in and out. Have you checked the little electrical connector where it goes into the signal conditioner? Over.

Yes. They're all about as tight as can be. I tell you what; I'll take them off and put them back on again and see if that makes any difference.

Okay. If you would, at your convience, we'll be watching it down here.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. We'd like you to try acquisition on the high gain antenna for us at pitch minus 90, yaw 270. Over.

Roger. That's in work.

Roger. Out.

11, this is Houston. We're showing about 6.8 percent on waste water on our telemetry now. Over.

Okay. We've got about 9, up here. Over.

Roger. Out.

11, Houston. We're standing by for your burn. Everything's looking good from down here.

Thank you, Bruce. You've got about a minute and 20 seconds.

Roger. We concur.

Houston, do you copy our residuals?

Roger. We've got your residual fuel counter reading for us.

DELTA-VC is plus 0.2.

Roger. Plus 0.2.

That was actually plus 100.2. Okay?

Okay.

Houston, Apollo 11.

Go ahead, 11.

Roger. We're in PTC attitude and would you please give us a call when our thruster activity has subsided sufficiently?

Roger. Stand by.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. We're going to hand over from Madrid to Goldstone at 151 hours even.



If you should lose lock on the high gain at this time, you may reaequire at pitch minus 45, yaw 270. Break. We're still watching your rates. Over.

Okay. Thank you.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. Over.

This is 11, Houston.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. Over.

Go ahead, Houston.

11, we're still seeing rates on your spacecraft above those we would like for the continuation of the PTC mode which we are still monitoring, and we'll advise you when it has settled down. Over.

Okay.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. You are go for the spinup on PTC. Over.

Thank you.

Houston, Apollo 11. Over.

Go ahead, 11.

Roger. It didn't like it that time. When I got down to the entry 27303 ENTER, it took off in roll at a high rate in excess of 1 degree per second. Over. I've stopped it now, and we are going to have to go back and do it over again. I'd like to try to find out the reason it did that.

Roger. You might as well start setting up for it, and we will be working the problem here.

Okay. Do you have us on high bit rate here now?

That's affirmative.

Okay, good. I'll maneuver back to PTC initiation attitude while you guys look at the data and see what you think.

Roger.



Houston, Apollo 11. I think the reason is in having 1620 on the DSKY during the subsequent entries, or at least that's one possibility.

Roger. We'll check it out.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. While you're waiting for the CSM to settle down and for us to look at the tapes on your latest maneuver, would you feel like answering some more questions with relation to the lunar surface? Over.

Go ahead.

Go ahead, Houston.

Roger. For 64 thousand dollars, we're still trying to work out the location of your landing site, Tranquility Base. We think it is located on LAM 2 chart at Juliet 0.5 and 7.8. Do you still have those charts on board? Over.

Yes. Stand by one. They're packed.

Roger. You may not have to unpack it. The position which I just gave you is slightly west of West Crater. I guess it's about two tenths of a kilometer west of it, and we were wondering if Neil or Buzz had observed any additional landmarks during descent, lunar stay, or ascent which would confirm or disprove this. One thing that we're wondering about is that if you were at this position, you would have seen the Cat's Paw during ascent just up to the north of your track. Over.

We were looking for the Cat's Paw, too, thinking we were probably downrange, beyond the Big V. But I think that it's likely that that might have been West Crater that we went across in landing, but - Stand by.

We're hoping, Bruce, that our 16 mm film was working at that point in descent, and we'll be able to confirm our touchdown position. We thought that during ascent we might be able to pick up some recognizable objects close to the landing site, and we did see a number of small craters, and crater rows, and things like that, which we may be able to pick out after the fact, but we haven't been able to yet.



Roger. And the next question from our panel is for Buzz. We recall that he reported seeing a laser upon AOS of the Earth the first time after - the first REV after ascent, and we're wondering what color the beam was and if he could determine at the approximate location with respect to the Earth. Over.

It was mostly white, perhaps a tinge of yellowish color to it; and it seemed to be - as I recall it, the terminator of the Earth was toward the horizon and seemed to be about a quarter to a third of the way down from - down towards the terminator of the Earth - from the opposite horizon. That's a third to a quarter Earth radii. Over.

Roger. And that puts it in the light side? Over.

Roger. Yes, it was in the light side. The Earth was about - a two thirds lit Earth, with the terminator down toward the horizon. And now coming from the opposite limb of the Earth, the sunlight limb, coming down about one quarter to one third of a radius in from the limb. Generally, pensively located with respect to a line drawn perpendicular to the terminator that goes through the center. Over.

Roger, Buzz. We copy.

And I got pictures of that. I'm sure that will show up.

And I saw that, too. It was a very bright spot of light and I confirm Buzz's observation of its position.

Okay, 11. Very good. Now, with respect to the documented sample container: on television it appeared to us as though the samples for that container were in fact being given - being selected in accordance with some thought or consideration being given to the rocks themselves. And we were wondering if you could give any further details from memory about any of these samples, and the context of the material or the surface from which they were taken. Over.



Yes. You remember I initially started on the cut side of the LM that the TV camera was on, and I took a number of samples of rocks on the surface, and several that were just subsurface - about 20 - 15 to 20 feet north of the LM. And then I recalled that that area had been probably swept pretty well by the exhaust of the descent engine, so I crossed over to the southern side of the LM, and took a number of samples from the area around the elongate double crater that we commented on, and several beyond that, and tried to take as many different types - of rock types as I could see by eye - as I could in the short time we had available. There were a number of other samples that I had seen earlier in our stroll around the LM that I had hoped to get back and pick up and put in the documented sample, but I didn't get those, and I'll be able to comment in detail when we get in the debriefing session.

Roger. Did you observe any small craters with conspicuously blocky rims? Over.

Well, aside from the one big one that we went over, I guess there were none in our area. I took a stroll back after putting up the EASEP, and while Buzz was starting to unpack the documented samples - took a stroll back to a crater behind us that was maybe 70 or 80 feet in diameter and 15 or 20 feet deep, and took some pictures of it. It had rocks in the bottom of pretty good size, considerably bigger than any that were out on the surface, but there was no - we apparently, at 15 feet or so, had not gotten below the regolith. We were essentially showing no bedrock, at least in the walls of the crater at that depth. Over.

CC Roger. We copy,

Okay. Thank you, Neil. That about wraps up the questions we have on hand for now.

Okay.

My compliments to the chef. The food is outstanding. This cream of chicken soup I give at least three spoons.



Okay. Cream of chicken, three spoons.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. Over.

Go ahead.

11, we concur that having VERB 16, NOUN 20 up on the DSKY may well have had some effect on your PTC initiation. It looks like this would give - let the computer work with a knowledge of the actual CDU angles. What we'd like you to do is do a CDU zero which is VERB 40, NOUN 20, ENTER, and then start the PTC procedure again at step 2 with loading VERB 6, NOUN 22, desired attitude in the AUTO maneuver, and all that. Over.

Okay. The only thing I don't understand about that is why it took off at the rate it did. What rate should it have taken off at under that theory?

Stand by a minute, Mike.

11, CMP, this is Houston. Over.

Go ahead, Houston.

Mike, over here on page 9 7 of your checklist where we're setting up PTC, there's been a note penciled in after, "Wait 20 minutes for rate to damp. Do not monitor VERB 16, NOUN 20." It turns out that the significance of that is that, if you are monitoring 16 NOUN 20, then when you get down here in step 7, the second time you do a VERB 24, you've got to reload the NOUN 01 to make it VERB 24, NOUN 01, ENTER, before you load the three registers. Over.

Roger, that. I was just questioning the rate at which the maneuver would begin if that were not done.

Roger. We're still working on computing the rate for you.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. We'd like you to select REACQ mode on the high gain antenna. Looks like we're about to lose you. Over.



Apollo 11, Apollo 11, this is Houston broadcasting in the blind. If you read us, attempt to acquire on OMNI antennas. Attempt to acquire us on OMNI antennas, if you read. This is Houston. Out.

Apollo 11, Apollo 11, this is Houston broadcasting in the blind. If you read, attempt acquisition on an OMNI antenna. Attempt acquisition using an OMNI antenna. Over.

Apollo 11, Apollo 11, this is Houston broadcasting in the blind. If you read, attempt contact using OMNI antenna, using an 0MNI antenna. This is Houston. Out.

Apollo 11, Apollo 11, this is Houston broadcasting in the blind. If you read us, attempt acquisition using an OMNI antenna. Attempt acquisition using an OMNI antenna. This is Houston. Out.

CT
... Goldstone.

Apollo 11, Apollo 11, this is Houston. Radio check. Over.

CT
Apollo 11, this is Houston. How do you read? Over.

Loud and clear, Bruce. How me?

Roger. What antenna are you using?

Houston, Apollo 11 is calling you on the high gain. How do you read? Over.

Roger. Loud and clear on the high gain.

So what's new?

Oh, we were wondering what was new with you up there.

It's all very quiet. We're just sitting here letting the thruster firing damp down. When they get good enough, let us know, and we'll start this PTC.



Roger.

Nice to sit here and watch the Earth getting larger and larger and the Moon smaller and smaller.

Roger. We'll give you a call when your rates have damped down sufficiently, and we're unable at the present time to predict what rate you should have seen at your last attempt to initiate PTC. We saw about 2 1/2 degrees per second. 0ver.

Yes. I believe that.

Buzz thinks we should have a PTC program built in the computer. He could very well be right.

Houston, Apollo 11.

Go ahead, 11.

Roger. I was just checking the radios, and how is the thruster activity coming?

11, Houston. The radios are still in good shape, and we are still waiting for your rates to decay. We've got 0.03 degrees per second in pitch now.

Okay. We're - we're in no rush. This is a very pleasant attitude, as a matter of fact. The Sun is down in the LEB, so it's not shining through the windows and heating the place up. We've got the Earth steady out window 1. We have the Moon steadily out window 3 and, of course, we are locked up on the high gain. So as long as the thermal people are happy, we're happy.

Roger. We copy.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. Over.

Go ahead, Houston.

Okay, 11. We are about ready to start PTC. I would like to give you some high gain antenna angles, though. We'd like to operate in the REACQ mode, and do you plan on spinning up in the positive or negative direction? 0ver.

We can do it either way. I had planned the positive.

Okay. For positive, the high gain antenna setting should be pitch plus 30, yaw 270, and in REACQ. Over.

Understand. REACQ, pitch plus 30, yaw 270. Thank you.

Roger. And if you would, when you're making your DSKY entries to set up for PTC, go a little slower, and we'll try to follow each entry from down here. Over.

Roger. Out.



Houston, 11. PTC established.

Roger, 11.

11, Houston. We observe the PTC to be fairly well established here, and we'll keep you posted on how it's going, and your friendly White Team commentator is taking over now.

Okay. Thanks to all you Black Team.

That was the Green Team.

Correction, all you Green Team - correction, Green Team. Excuse me.

Roger. Out.

How could I forget. I used to be a "Green" one.

Hello, Apollo 11, Houston. Your White Team is now on. We're standing by for an exciting evening of TV and a presleep report. Over.

06 09 53 03
(Unidentifiable Noise)

SC
(Laughter)

Apollo 11, Houston. You sure you don't have anybody else in there with you?

Houston, Apollo 11. Say again, please.

We had some strange noises coming down on the downlink, and it sounded like you had some friends up there.

Where - where do the White Team go during their off hours anyway?

Say again.

(Unindentifiable Noise)

Apollo 11, Houston. Over.

Go ahead, Houston.

Roger. Would you ver - We've lost COMM with you for about the last 10 minutes. Would you verify that the S band track switch is in REACQ? Over.

Negative. It's not. The last time we broke lock, we went to AUTO, and I left it there. Sorry.

Roger. We'd like to have you to put it in REACQ, and monitor. In about 2 minutes, we'll be coming up on the high gain. Would you monitor the REACQ? If it doesn't take, acquire manually. Over.

Okay. Say again the angles you'd like.

We'll - we'll try to switch it ourselves. Stand by on the angles.

Buzz, it's pitch plus 30, yaw 270. Over.

Roger. I've got them.

Thank you.

Hello, Apollo 11. Houston. Would you please terminate battery charge now? Over.

Roger. Terminating battery charge.

Roger.

Hello, Apollo 11. Houston. Any special attitude you'd like us to look at for the TV? Over.

I don't guess we have a requirement there, Charlie.

Roger. We have an attitude that we can get the Earth out of a window or the Moon. We're trying to look at - find one that we can get both, if that's what you'd like. Over.

A 50 degree roll attitude will probably give us that, Joe.

Roger.

That's a good one because it puts the Earth out window 1 and the Moon out window 3 and puts the Sun down in the LEB, so the lighting in here remains relatively constant.

Roger. Well, we'll just stop on the 50 roll, then, and we'll give you the word when to do that. Over.

Okay.

Apollo 11, Houston. We'll have high gain coverage about 155 30. At that time, you can turn on the TV if you desire, and continue your roll around until you get 50 degrees roll. Over.

Okay.

Apollo 11, Houston. We were going to give you the All Star game tonight, but it was rained out. Over.

SC
11, Houston. We're on the high gain. You can warm up the SM now if you like. Over.

Apollo 11, Houston. We see you coming up on 50 roll. How does that attitude look? Over.

Apollo 11, Houston. We're ready for the TV; we're all configured. At your convenience. Over.

Houston, Apollo 11. Over.

Roger. Go ahead, 11. Over.

Are you picking up our TV signals?

That's affirmative. We have it up on the Eidephor now. The focus is a little bit out. We see the Earth in the center of the screen.

Still have a little white dot in the bottom of the camera, apparently. And see some landmasses in the center, at least I guess that's what it is. It's very hazy at this time on our Eidephor. Over.

Let me change

Believe that's where we just came from.

It is, huh? Well, I'm really looking at the bad - at a bad screen here. Stand by one. Hey, you're right.

It's not bad enough not finding the right landing spot

... screen now.

It's not bad enough not finding the right landing spot when you haven't even got the right planet!

I'll never live that one down.

We're making it get smaller and smaller here to make sure that it really is the one we're leaving.

All right. That's enough you guys.

11, that was a good picture there.

Okay. That's enough of the Moon.

Okay. That's enough of the Moon, Charlie. We're getting set up now for some inside pictures.

Roger.

We know there's a lot of scientists from a number of countries standing by to see the lunar samples, and we thought you'd be interested to see them as they really are here. These two boxes are the sample return containers. They - They're vacuum packed containers that were closed in a vacuum on the lunar surface, sealed, and then brought inside the LM and put inside these fiber glass bags, zippered, and resealed around the outside, and placed in these receptacles in the side of the command module. These are the two boxes. And as soon as we get onto the ship,



I'm sure these boxes will immediately be transferred and delivery started to the Lunar Receiving Laboratory. These boxes include the samples of the various types of rock, the groundmass of the soil, the sand and silt, and the particle collector for the solar wind experiment, and the core tubes that took depth samples of the lunar surface.

Roger, Neil. Thank you much for that description. We've got a pretty dark picture down here. Could you check your f stop? We'd like to have it - See if you can open it up a little bit. Over.

Okay. Our monitor showed that to be very bright.

Roger.

... We're down around between, well around f:4, which we thought would be plenty light. Well, we'll lighten it up some more.

Well, we'd appreciate it. It's pretty dark on all our monitors here.

Okay. Fine.

It's looking a lot better now, Neil.

There's Buzz.

11, Houston. We have an excellent picture now. Over.

Okay. How do you read me, Charlie?

Five by now, Buzz. Over.

Okay. The more mundane affairs, now that we've left the Moon, I'd like to trace through them a little bit for you *** developments that have taken place in the food department. I'm sure you've already *** type of a drink container. A little later, Mike will show you how the water gun operates with its new filter to take out the hydrogen. Essentially, this water gun is put in this end and fills up this bag with water, and the drink then dissolves in the water, and this end of the *** outfeeding. Likewise, we have other foods that are more solid nature. You can

probably see this shrimp cocktail meal. *** this afternoon while the two of us had salmon salad. *** another early development was the use of bite size food ***

11, Houston. Buzz, you're breaking up badly. Will you check your VOX? Over.

Roger. How am I coming through now, Charlie?

Roger. You're very clear when you come through. It's just that your VOX is not keying at every word. Over.

Okay. These bite sized objects were designed to remove the problem of having so many crumbs floating around in the cabin, so they designed a particular size that would be able to go to the mouth all at once. I think since all of our experience, we've discovered that we could progress a good bit further than that back some of the type meals that we have on Earth. As a matter of fact, on this flight we've carried along pieces of bread, and along with the bread we have a ham spread; and I'll show you, I hope, how easy it is to spread some ham while I'm in zero g.

I think we've discovered that it is quite easy to *** you're all very familiar with.

Apollo 11, Houston. We notice your roll rate increasing. Will you please see if you can bring that down to about 04 or we'll be losing high gain shortly. Over.

You can also use zero gravity to demonstrate many things that we've all learned in school. I'd like to demonstrate briefly how easy it is to explain the action of the gyroscope. If I spin this can, we know that according to the equations of motion that we would expect that once this is given a spin, and has a spin axis in this direction, if we give it a particular torque, and I'll do this by pushing my hands against it in this fashion once it's spinning. By the equations we can predict that, as I put this torque on it, it will in fact rotate this direction. Let's see how well this works out.

See that as I apply the torque this way, it's rotated this way.

Too close, I think.

11, Houston. It's a pretty good demonstration.

Houston, this next is a little demonstration for the kids at home, all kids everywhere, for that matter. I was going to show you how you drink water out of a spoon, but I'm afraid I filled the spoon too full and if I'm not careful, I'm going to spill water right over the sides. Can you see the water slopping around on the top of the spoon, kids?

That's affirmative, 11.

Okay. Well, as I said, I was going to show you but I'm afraid I filled it too full and it's going to spill over the sides. I'll tell you what. I'll just turn this one over and get rid of the water and start all over again. Okay?

Okay.

And you can see, up here we don't know where over is. One up is as good as another. That really is water, though. I'll show you.

That's really not the way we drink. We really have a water gun which I'll show you.

Here's the water gun. This cylindrical thing on the end of it is a filter with several membranes: one allows water to pass, but not any gas; the other allows gas to pass, but not any water. So, by routing the gaseous water which comes from our tank through this filter, we're enabled to drink purified water without the gas in it, filtered water. And, of course, all we do to - to get it started is just pull the trigger.

It's sort of messy. I haven't been at this very long. It's sort of the same system that the Spaniards used to drink out of wineskins at bull fights, only I think this is even more fun. Well, be seeing you, kids.



Thank you from all us kids in the world, here in the MOCR, who can't tell the Earth from the Moon.

Roger. Stand by one, and we'll get you that Earth one.

Looks like you need a wine skin up there, Mike.

That'd be nice.

Okay.

11, Houston

You have a picture now, Houston?

That's affirmative. I refuse to bite on this one, though. You tell us.

Okay. This should be getting larger, and if it is, it's the place we're coming home to.

Roger.

No matter where you travel, it's always nice to get home.

We concur, 11. We'll be happy to have you back.

This is Apollo 11. Signing off.

Roger. Thank you very much, 11. That was a good demonstration and a good show. We appreciate it very much.

Apollo 11, Houston. We were curious to see if there was any excess moisture up around the tunnel hatch area as we saw on 10. Over.

It just so happens that's what we were talking about now. There is a little bit of dampness around the outside edge of the hatch, but a very, very slight amount. We've got a hose up there that we're hoping will sort of help keep it a little bit dry.



Roger, Mike. Thank you much. Have you seen any more water collecting on the aft bulkhead? Over.

No, we haven't, as a matter of fact. It's been dry in that area since we got rid of that last time.

Roger. Thank you.

Apollo 11 is back in PTC attitude. Standing by for thruster quieting.

Roger. We see that. Thank you much, Mike.

Houston, Apollo 11. Could you get a little summary of the evening news for us?

Yes, sir. We'll have it for you momentarily. Also, a little flight plan update, Mike. If you - On page 3 113, you can delete the O2 fuel cell purge. Over.

Will do.

There is a flurry of activity in the PA0 site for the evening news.

Bully.

How's the weather down there? You got any rain?

Roger. We've been having a little bit, thunderstorm type, the last couple of days. We had a pretty good rain today, smd it's been overcast. A slow storm system's been moving through the area in the last couple of days, and primarily evening and afternoon thundershowers.

Roger. We were watching a few clouds in your area through the monocular along the Texas Gulf Coast this afternoon, and we also noticed there were clouds over Baja California, which is a little bit unusual.

Roger. Thank you for the weather report. We can't quite see that far. It seems to have



cleared up outside now, according to some of the people coming in. This constant overcast in the MOCR here is a little hard to see outside.

Yes. We also noticed it was a little overcast down over - in the Antarctic ice cap, too.

Roger. It's apparently raining pretty hard up

How's that for one-upsmanship?

Yes. (Laughter).

He may know that, but he doesn't even know whether his grass is wet or dry.

It's apparently raining fairly hard up in Washington where the All Star game was to be played tonight. They started out, I understand, and then it was rained out and they called it off.

They need a roof on their stadium so they can catch all those flys.

Roger.

In the rain.

Touch.

06 12 10 O1        Hey, Charlie, what's the preliminary outlook for the weather in our recovery are%?

Stand by Buzz. It looks pretty good as far as I could tell. We got the - along the tropical convergence line there, there's a few clouds shown on the weather map I'm looking at here, but nothing of significance. Right now - Stand by. Let's see, right now in the mid - yes, at the MPL - we've got 3000 scattered, visibility 10, waves height 3 feet, is the present weather. I don't think there's anything forecast to be of significance. There are a couple of - FLIGHT just informed me that what I just gave you was the forecast.



are a couple of tropical storms in the - well, not in the area of landing but in the Pacific. A storm called Claudia which is north - correction - about east of Hawaii. It's going northwest and dissipating. And there's one called Viola, which is out over Guam, and so they aren't any factor at all. It looks like it's going to be real nice for recovery.

Navy called up those special calm seas for you guys from up there on the Hudson.

Well, we might need it. We'll get a look at it tomorrow, I guess, though. We'll probably be giving it a pretty close eye.

Roger.

11, Houston. The RETRO's were wondering if you could fill us in on any non nominal stowage that we have on board. Just location and weight is about all they're interested in. Over.

Roger. We'll do some work on that and let you know, Charlie.

Thank you, sir.

And, Apollo 11, Houston. Would you please place O2 tank 1 heater to AUTO? Over.

AUTO it is.

Houston, Apollo 11.

Go ahead.

What we'll do Charlie, tomorrow, is go through and reconfigure our stowage as closely as possible to nominal. Some things that will not be nominal are as follows: the EVA visors were brought back into the command module, and we have not yet found a home for them. We'll let you know where they go. In addition, there's about 5 pounds of miscellaneous weight from the LM



in compartment Able 8, and it's taking the place of the LCG's which we moved from A 8 into the suit bag. We got rid of one miscellaneous trash bag, mostly old food wrapping and also old underwear and that helmet protective visor of the CMP's. We left all that with Eagle. And those are about the only off nominals we have.

Thank you very much. We appreciate it. Out.

Roger.

Apollo 11, Houston. We got the rates looking copacetic. You can go ahead and initiate PTC. Over.

Okay. Thank you.

And Buzz, we're still not getting any data from your EKG. It looks like the only way that we're going to be able to get any is if, at your convenience, you would take your - change out your EKG leads, which are the center ones that are connected to the blue pin; and there's a spare one in the medical box. Over.

Roger. How many did you want me to change?

Just the center one. I'll get the right nomenclature from the Doc. Stand by. It's called the sternal EKG, which are the three center ones, and it's got - they lead into a - into the blue stringed lead ones. Over.

Okay. There's three of them, is that right?

That's affirmative.

And you want me to change all three.

That's affirmative and they're all hooked together from the picture I'm looking at, and they go into the center belt, signal conditioner, and it's got the blue strain relief on it.

Yes. I checked the connectors at both ends on that. I don't guess we have a spare signal conditioner or anything like that, do we?

No. We do not.

Well, I can show you my heart's still working.

We believe it.

Charlie, what we suggest here is, before we start that, turn our two suit powers off and plug his blue lead into my blue signal conditioner and see if we can get his signal through my signal conditioner. Okay?

Roger. That's a good suggestion, Neil. We concur. Over.

Okay, Charlie. We're transmitting, and let's see if you get any EKG signal on the CDR at this point.

Roger. Stand by.

11, Houston. We get some data, but it's got the same problem that we had through Buzz's signal conditioner, so apparently the lead is broken and we'd like you to change it out if you could. Over.

Okay.

Thank you.

Houston, Apollo 11.

Go ahead, sir.



Roger. I think the problem was that the center lead had dried out. ... put the new one on, and I'll see how that works. Over.

Roger.

I can't tell you how good it feels to get it off.

Yes. I can imagine.

Houston, Apollo 11. Houston, Apollo 11.

Go ahead, 11. Over.

Roger. How do you read my EKG now?

Stand by. We'll let the docs look at it. Buzz, we're on low bit rate. We'll get you on a high gain momentarily, and we'll let you know then. Over.

Okay. I got my high gain antenna coming out.

Roger. Just leave on REACQ. We'll get you.

Apollo 11, Houston. Buzz, your EKG looks good now. The doc said thanks a lot.

Okay. They're welcome.

Apollo 11, Houston. Based on our sighting since the midcourse, we're showing a gamma of minus 6.57. This is preliminary, though, and we think that after some more tracking it should come on in, and we could tweak it right on into the corridor. It's just about in the center of the corridor; everything's looking fine. We'll have you an entry PAD in a couple of hours before you go to sleep. And from our friends in public affairs, a few headlines, other than your flight. You're still dominating the news. However, there are some other things of interest for you. As I mentioned earlier, the All Star game was rained out. It's going to be played tomorrow. However, President Nixon will not be able to see it as he planned. We'll keep you posted on results. And, also, the weathermen are going to be good to you. Our forecast is, looks like it's holding good for the recovery area; it should be real fine out there. President Nixon, as he prepares to fly out to greet



your return, predicted that within 31 years man will have visited at least one other planet bearing some form of life. "In the year 2000, we, on this Earth, will have visited new worlds where there will be a form of life," he told 2000 foreign exchange students at the White House. Before he left for his week long trip, the President sent Congress his proposal for organizing - reorganizing the Interstate Commerce Commission. He also conferred with chairman Earl Wheeler of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on his return from Viet Nam, and the launch of Intelstat was scrubbed and has been rescheduled for 10 p.m., eastern daylight time on Wednesday. The second stage fuel ground support system showed some contamination.

And back in Washington, the House Ways and Means Committee agreed to tax changes affecting oil companies, banks, and utilities that could add nearly 2 billion a year to federal revenue. And, also today, NASA announced it will launch a large orbital workshop in 1972, with a cutdown version of the Saturn V. And, your television pictures attracted a lot of interest. They were shown live throughout just about the whole world, and, we're expecting hundreds of telephone calls from mothers all over the world complaining that their youngsters are trying to drink milk from spoons, thanks to you, Mike.

I take it all back.

You need more practice.

Hello, Apollo 11. Houston. Buzz, you brought the surgeon right out of his chair. We see you exercising. Over.

Say again.

We see you exercising. Is that correct, Buzz?

Yes, that's right. Buzz is.

Roger. We've got his heartbeat way up.

Right. He's sort of out of shape.

Yes. That's what we thought.

White Team's really got a busy one tonight, huh, Charlie?

Say again, Mike. Over.

Say the old White Team's really got a busy one tonight, huh?

Oh, boy. We're really booming along here with all this activity. Can barely believe it.

What are you doing? Sitting around with your feet up on the console drinking coffee?

(Laughter) You must have your X ray eyes up. You sure can see a long way.

Yes. We're watching you as well, you know.

All right.

Two people in the viewing room and that's more than is in the trench.

We've got eight in the viewing room, and let's see, about six in the trench right now. And this is the highlight of the day; Buzz's exercise for the surgeon.

11, you copy? Over.

Roger. 11.

Roger. Neil has the highest heartbeat ever seen on a manned space flight, and we just went low bit rate. The surgeon is about to die. (Laughter)

I measured it up here. It came out to be 247.

Boy, that's super.

The unit's on that furlong per fortnight.

Roger. We copy that. EECOMM says if you keep that up, you're going to have to change your CO2 canister.



You were going to make me do that in another 45 minutes anyway.

That's true.

That's the highlight of my day. I'm really looking forward to that.

06 14 01 00
(Music: "Music Out of the Moon")

Thank you, 11. We appreciate you turning that off. (Laughter)

Charlie, could you copy our music down there?

Did we copy what, Neil?

Did you copy our music down there?

Roger. We sure did. We're wondering who selected - made your selections?

That's an old favorite of mine, about - It's an album made about 20 years ago, called "Music Out of the Moon."

Roger. It sounded a little scratchy to us, Neil. Either that or your tape was a little slow.

It's supposed to sound that way.

That's one of those

it sounds a little scratchy to us too, but the czar likes it.

That's what we figured. He and his 40,000 votes.

For your info, we got you - It looks like about 150,000 out now.

MS
It's getting appreciably larger now. It's looklng more like the world.

Roger. I'm looking at the right side of the screen this time.

How's everything going on the - Say again, Charlie?



Oh, just - I -I'll never hear the last of that one about that Earth/Moon business during the TV there, and I was just saying that I was looking at the right side of the board here, so you are going towards the Earth. What are - What were you going to say, Mike?

You'll have - You'll have fun at the press conference after this shift then, won't you?

It's 2:30. Everybody will be asleep. I going to sneak off through the back way.

Okay. I was just wondering how everything is going at the home front. All the wives and kids in one piece?

Roger. Sure are. Everything's doing fine. All the gals are having a little party tonight, as far as I know.

Oh, good. Glad to hear it.

Apollo 11, Houston. I was just reading some of the transcripts of earlier today about this earlier PTC that we attempted, and when you keyed into VERB 24 and did the two ENTER's, it took off on you. I think we got a story on that, if you'd like to listen to why it had such a high rate, Mike. Over.

Yes. I'm all ears.

Okay. I think it would be better if you got your checklist out on 97, and we could walk you through it, and that way I could probably get the story straight. Over.

Okay. I got it.

Okay. Mike, what happened is - you know, you were sitting there monitoring VERB 16, NOUN 20, and at step 7 you went into VERB 24, NOUN 01, and keyed in the address and then INFORMATION INFORMATION; and on the final ENTER of that 35400 ENTER, right after that, it - that then put you back into the 16, NOUN 20. Then when you did the VERB 24, ENTER, you were really entering the information in the actual CDU; and when you got the two entries in, in register 1 and 2, it was an - it was an instantaneous change in the actual CDU, and the CM DAP looked at that and saw - saw what it thought it



had. My - my gosh, I got a 600 degree per second rate. And it turns on the jets to try to take that rate out. And the rate filters that it's looking at - it - well, the rate it's looking at is filtered, so it doesn't really sense the actual rate until the thing is already built up, and then it starts reading the rate filters, and it says, "Well, I really didn't have 600 degrees." So then it turns it off and tries to slow it down. But until that happens, and it is some time lag, and that's why the rate was building up. The jets were on, and they were going to stay on due to that instantaneous 600 - suspected 600 degree per second rate. Over.

Okay. I got you.

Roger.

Man.

Hey, Charlie, are you saying that for a short period of time, he actually loaded NOUN 20 with some value other than was being read by the CDU?

I think I got that, Buzz. That's affirmative. But when he did that second VERB 24, you were - the NOUN was 20, so when he did the 3175 and then a 002 ENTER, what he actually did there was load the first two actual CDU locations, and the computer looked at it - the DAP looked at it as an instantaneous change in the actual CDU. Stand by on your comments. We're switching antennas.

Roger.

We're very scratchy.

Okay.

11, Houston. We got you back now on the high gain. Did you copy all that, Buzz? Over.

Yes. I think so. I - I thought maybe that NOUN 20 was one of those that you could never load from the DSKY, and that still maybe. Maybe it was loaded just for the short period of time, and then when the counters read the - the gimbal angles, why they changed it back to what they actually are. But in the meantime, the DAP saw this different number. Is that right?



Well, our guidance guy was telling me that you can actually load those ACDU's, the actual CDU's, but we'll - we're checking on that. Over.

Okay.

11, Houston. Buzz, the word from the back room is that you can actually load the NOUN 20, but you should not.

Yes. I got that. Thank you.

You're welcome.

Apollo 11, Houston. We got a recommendation for you on your stowage of the EVVA's. Over.

Go ahead.

Okay. We'd like - the SPAN guys say it looks - they think that one would go on the helmet that you're going to have in B1, and you could put the other one on Mike's helmet, which will be in the sleep restraint. Over.

I doubt if it will fit on the helmet in B1. The other one might - might go in the sleep restraint. We've got them in our helmet bags, and I guess we're going to have to keep the helmets in the helmet bags, and the LEVVA's in the LEVVA bags.

Roger.

Yes. I've been thinking maybe they ought to stay sealed up.

Okay. We

It won't hack B1, Charlie, with the cover. I tried it already.

Okay. Fine. We weren't sure of that. It was just a suggestion. We thought we'd - You check it out. Sounds like you've already done that, so I guess whatever you can come up with, just let us know.

Okay. There's no problem. We'll let you know where they end up.

Roger.

Hello, Houston. Apollo 11.

Go ahead, 11. Over.

Okay. Crew status report. Radiation: CDR 11020, CMP 10022, LMP 09024. No medication.

Roger. Copy.

And, Neil, we got - we'd like your onboard readouts of batteries and RCS. Over.

Okay.

Okay, Charlie. Ready to copy?

Roger. Go ahead. Over.

Okay. BATT C, PYRO BATT A, and PYRO BATT B are 37.0. RCS A, 51; B, 63; C, 63; D, 59. Go.

Roger. Copy all that, Neil. And we got an entry PAD if you're ready to copy. Over.

Houston, Apollo 11. Ready to copy. Over.

Roger, Buzz. It's an entry PAD, MPL, starting with roll 05, 35 - correction - 359 152 001. GET 194 46 03 267, plus 1102, minus 17203, 068, NOUN 60, 36194 656 11894 36275 195 03 03 0027, NOUN 69, all four lines are NA. Picking up with D zero: 400 02 09. RET of blackout, 00 17 03 38 08 20. Sextant star, 02 0945 149. Boresight star is Scorpii theta, that's Scorpii theta. Up 315, right 35, lift vector up. And the comments: This entry PAD assumes no midcourse 6. And for your information, looking at it right now, based on all the tracking we got, that maneuver would only be a tenth of a foot per second. So, we'll probably skip it. We'll let you know more about that later. Okay. Your horizon check at EI minus 30 minutes, GET of 194 33 03, gives you a pitch angle of 298. Okay. The GDC, your backup align - Your set stars for the entry REFSMMAT are Deneb and Vega, 079 234 340. Standing by for your readback. Over.



Roger. Lunar entry, MPL: 359 152 001 194 46 03 267, plus 1102, minus 17203 068 36194 656 11894 36275; 195 03 03 0027, four NA, 400 02 09 00 17 03 38 08 20 02 0945 149, Scorpii theta. Up 315, right 35, up. Assumes no MCC 6. Horizon at EI minus 30 194 33 03, and pitch 298. Set stars Deneb and Vega, 079 234 340. Over.

Roger. Very good readback, Buzz, and for your communication setup for tonight's sleep, we'd like 0MNI to OMNI. Stand by.

Apollo 11, Houston. If you didn't copy that, Buzz, it was a good readback on the PAD. We've got a clock update for you that we'll have to you as soon as we can get it out to the site. We're in the process of handing over to Honeysuckle, and it will be a couple of minutes. Over.

Okay. You want the computer to BLOCK?

We'll call you. You can stay BLOCK right now. We'll give you a call.

Hello, Apollo 11. Houston. Would you please give us P00 and ACCEPT? We've got a clock update for you.

Go ahead, Charlie. We're P00 and ACCEPT.

Roger.

11, HOUSTON. We've got the load in. You can go back to BLOCK. Over.

Roger. Thank you.

And 11, Houston. One final thing. We'd like you to select your OMNI to OMNI, OMNI A to Bravo, high gain track to MANUAL, and beam WIDE. Your angles are 270 in yaw, pitch minus 50. Over.

Roger. Fifty and minus 70.

The angles, Buzz, were yaw 270, pitch minus 50. Over.

Okay. Yaw 270, pitch minus 50.



That's Roger.

And Apollo 11, it's good night from a sleepy White Team. Over.

Roger. Thank you very much. We're not as sleepy tonight as we were last night.

Yes. I guess you guys were pretty tired last night after that busy day.

That's affirmative. I couldn't even find the chlorine.

(Laughing) Yes.

Hello, Apollo 11. Houston. Sorry to bother you, but we'd like to have you do a VERB 34 to get the NOUN 65 off of there. Over.

REST PERIOD - NO COMMUNICATIONS

APOLLO 11 AIR-TO-GROUND VOICE TRANSCRIPTION


REST PERIOD - NO COMMUNICATIONS

APOLLO 11 AIR-TO-GROUND VOICE TRANSCRIPTION


REST PERIOD - NO COMMUNICATIONS

APOLLO 11 AIR-TO-GROUND VOICE TRANSCRIPTION


REST PERIOD - NO COMMUNICATIONS

APOLLO 11 AIR-TO-GROUND VOICE TRANSCRIPTION


REST PERIOD - NO COMMUNICATIONS

APOLLO 11 AIR-TO-GROUND VOICE TRANSCRIPTION


REST PERIOD - NO COMMUNICATIONS

APOLLO 11 AIR-TO-GROUND VOICE TRANSCRIPTION


Apollo 11, Houston. Are you up and at them yet? Qver.

Well, we're up, at least, Owen.

Eyeballing my Magellanic clouds. Over.

11, Houston. Got your signals loud and clear, here. How are things this morning? Over.

Do you read us, Owen?

Roger. Loud and clear, 11.

Okay. Everything *** to be all right here. So far, we haven't been looking in the cockpit yet. We've been spending our time looking outside the cockpit. ***

Roger, 11. You're breaking up just a little bit there, Neil. Your signals are loud but are breaking up occasionally. Your spacecraft all looks good here from the ground. We noticed you stirring around the cockpit and thought we'd give you a call. Over.

Good morning.

11, Houston. We do have a few items for you here, entry PAD's, consumables, and so forth. After you've had a chance to get organized, whenever you're ready to start on a few of these items, why, we'll read them up to you. Over.

Okay. Stand by.

Go ahead, Owen. I've got the book now. I'm ready to copy.

Okay, Buzz. On your flight plan items, a few updates first of all. We've cancelled midcourse number 6. Just remain - remain in PTC. I'll give you a little more time this morning. Second item on the flight plan is we're ready for a BATT B charge anytime you want to put it on the line; and third item, we'd like a waste water dump a little differently this time. We'd like

to do it on our marks from the ground. The PTC is a little bit ragged, and we would like to make the water dump at a time which we think will hold it in its proper configuration, so it looks like we'll have a desirable opportunity coming along in - between 15 and 20 minutes. And on our mark, we would like to have a waste water dunp down to about 40 percent. I'll give you a more accurate level for the water dump a little later. Over.

Roger. You must have stayed up all night figuring this one out.

11, Houston. Stand by just a moment here until we get out of the NO position on the antenna.

11, Houston. We're over on OMNI Delta now. I think we can read you better. Did you get all those first three items on your flight plan update? Over.

I got midcourse correction cancelled; battery B charge and water dump on your call. Over.

That's right, Buzz; and the last item here, we do request that we do a P52, even though we're not doing midcourse correction; and we suggest you get to that after the waste water dump has been complete. We also have a state vector update for you, if you can give us P00 and ACCEPT. Over.

Okay. You have the DSKY now.

Roger. We'll be sending that up, and I'll give you your consumables update now. It's - for a time of 170 hours, your RCS total is minus 3.5 percent, Alfa is minus 14.5, Bravo plus 7, Charlie minus 4.5, Delta minus 3; hydrogen total is minus 1, and your oxygen total is plus 24. Over.

Roger. Copy those. And onboard readouts, D is 69, C is 73, D is - Let me start over again. Okay. A is 51 and B is 62; C is 63 and D is 59. Over.

Roger, 11. Copy those, and we've checked them here on the ground, also. One correction to my last transmission. We would like that P52 prior to the waste water dump, which is coming up in about 30 minutes from now. Will that be possible? Over.



Oh, yes. We'll take care of that.

Roger. And if you're ready for an entry PAD, I'll read that up to you now, also, 11.

Ready to copy.

Okay. Entry PAD is area MIDPAC: 359 153 001 194 46 03 267, plus 1102, minus 17203 067 36194 655 11875 36275 195 03 03 00 28; DL and VL, all four are not applicable; DO, 4 00 02 10 00 18 03 38 08 21 44 2932 380; boresight star is Scorpio Theta, up 314, right 34, lift vector up. Comments: Entry data assumes no midcourse maneuvers. Your earth entry: minus 30 minutes; horizon check, 194 plus 33 plus 03. Your pitch is 297. This assumes an entry REFSMMAT. Your GDC align stars are Deneb and Vega. Roll, pitch, yaw, 078, 233, 340. Read back. Over.

Roger. MIDPAC entry PAD: 359 153 001 194 46 03 267, plus 1102, minus 17203 067 36194 655 11875 36275 195 03 03 0028, DL and VL NA, 4 00 02 10 00 18 03 38 08 21 44 2932 380, Scorpii Delta - Scorpii Theta, up 314, right 34, up. No midcourse correction, horizon, TI minus 30, 194 33 03, pitch 297, Deneb and Vega, 078, 233, 340. Over.

11, Houston. That's Roger. Copy. 11, it's also your computer. You can go back to BLOCK.

Roger.

Okay, Houston. The crew status report is 8 1/2, 7, and 8.

11, Houston. Roger, Neil. 8 1/2, 7, and 8 for your crew status.

Right.

11, Houston. Your P52 looks good here on the ground, and we are now estimating that water dump will occur along about 171 plus 40; and we'd like for you to dump to 45 percent. This should let you arrive at Earth interface with just about a full load of waste water. Over.

Understand 171 40, approximately, 40 percent.



11, Houston. We'd like to advance the time on that water dump to about 171 plus 30 just after we reacquire on the next 0MNI, and - as I mentioned, it'll be down to 45 percent - is the new quantity. Also, we're standing by for your CM RCS ejector temperature readout. Over.

Apollo 11, Houston. I'm not certain you copied my last transmission, as we were just in the process of switching OMNI's. We'd like to advance the time on that water dump until about 5 minutes from now. And we'll give you a precise mark on the time to start the dump, and we are standing by for a readout on your CM RCS ejector temperatures. Over.

Okay, Owen. We're standing by for your mark, and stand by for the readout.

Roger.

Houston, Apollo 11. Are you ready to copy ejector temperatures? I'll read them in volts.

That's affirmative. Go ahead, Mike.

Okay. 2 4 is reading 4.7 volts, 2 5 is reading 4.8 volts, 1 2 is reading 4.8 volts, 1 4 is reading 4.8, 1 6 4.5, and 2 1 4.8. Over.

11, Houston. Roger. Those - I got them all.

Apollo 11, Houston. We're ready for you to start your waste water dump at this time. Over.

Roger. Dumping.

Apollo 11, Houston. We show you

Houston, Apollo 11. We've dumped to 45 percent, and we're stopping now. Do you concur?

Roger, 11. We concur.

Apollo 11, Houston. I can read up your forecast weather for the recovery any time you'd like to hear about it. Over.

Go ahead.



11, Houston. Present forecast shows acceptable conditions in your recovery area: 2000 foot scattered, high scattered, wind from 070 degrees, 13 knots, visibility 10 miles, and sea state about 4 feet. The forecast yesterday showed a tropical storm, Claudia, some 500 to 1000 miles east of Hawaii. The - the pictures from Earth satellites taken yesterday afternoon - afternoon showed Claudia dissipating, so this appears to be even less a factor than it was before. Your recovery area is now believed to be just a little ways north of the intertropical convergence zone, which you can probably see when you look out your windows there. Yesterday there was also a report of a tropical storm, Viola, further to the west. Its present location is some thousand miles east of the Phillipines and moving northwest. Tropical storm Viola has been intensifying, and should be transferred to the typhoon category within the next 12 hours or so; however, that will be far to your west. As a matter of fact, sunrise terminator has not yet reached Viola. When it does several hours from now, you can probably distinguish it from your viewpoint quite readily. As a matter of fact it should be of interest to perhaps take some pictures. Comment on it when you get a chance to see Viola in a few hours. So that's about the present weather state and situation for your recovery area. Over.

That sounds pretty good ...

Apollo 11, Houston. Over.

Go ahead, Houston.

11, Houston. We'd like to try operation with the high gain array here. If you would select reacquire and your S band antenna to HIGH GAIN, your positions are pitch plus 40 and yaw 270, and then monitor for acquisition. Over.

Okay. It's in work.

11, Houston. We're just now ready to switch from OMNI Delta over to your high gain antenna. Can you confirm that you have gone to REACQ? Over.

Confirmed.

That looks real good, Mike. Looks like we picked up about 30 dB on the signal strength.

Yes. It came in quite quickly. However, I'm showing about 240 yaw and about zero on pitch, now.

Roger. About 240 and 0.

Apollo 11, Houston. Over.

Go ahead.

Roger. Just wanted to make sure you fellows hadn't gone back to sleep again. And I also have a little bit of late news here if you'd like to find out what's happened in the last 12 - 14 hours. Over.

Okay. Go ahead.

Okey doke. Hot off the press here: We find Juan Carlos was formally designated yesterday - Tuesday - to become General Franco's successor - as the Chief of State of Spain and eventual King. Juan Carlos will be sworn in today as his successor designate after taking an oath of loyalty to the law and the National Movement, Spain's only legal political organization. He will apparently be called the Prince of Spain.

House Ways and Means Committee also has agreed yesterday to tax changes affecting oil companies, also banks and utilities, which could add as much as 2 billion dollars per year to the federal revenue. The committee also voted tentatively to change the accounting procedures for telephone, electric, gas, and oil pipeline companies and to reduce tax benefits of mutual savings and loan institutions. So, it looks as if tax reform may be on the way.

Looking overseas, we find South Korea's first super highway, linking Seoul with the Port of Inchon, has been named the Apollo Highway to commemorate your trip. I think we mentioned last night that President Nixon has already started on his round the world trip, and today he is in San Francisco on his first stop which will take him to the U.S.S. Hornet, from which he'll watch the return of your spacecraft. He plans to visit seven nations including Rumania during this trip. He, as I think you also knew, had to miss the All Star baseball game yesterday, as it was rained out; but it is being played today.



The West Coast residents in Seattle, Washington; Portland, Oregon; Vancouver, British Columbia; and San Francisco all plan to make their areas visible to the three of you by lighting their lights between 9 pm and midnight tonight, according to the Associated Press. We do have clear weather predicted there, so you may be able to see Christmas lights, porch lights, store lights, and whatever may be turned on.

Good show.

A little closer to home here, back in Memphis, Tennessee, a young lady who is presently tipping the scales at 8 pounds, 2 ounces, was named "Module" by her parents, Mr. and Mrs. Eddie Lee McGhee. "It wasn't my idea." said Mrs. McGhee, "It was my husband's." She said she had balked at the name Lunar Module McGhee, because it didn't sound too good, but apparently they have compromised on just Module. Over.

SC
(Laughter) ...

Roger. Hear a few chuckles coming from that direction. And we do have a late report on the sports here also. The All Star game currently being played. The present score at the end of the fourth inning has the National League leading the American League by 9 to 3. So the hitters are having a good day, you can tell.

And rain clouds are over the MSC area at the moment. It began raining here just about 10 minutes ago, and last report, we were having a pretty heavy deluge. So, that's it from the news front for the afternoon here, Apollo 11. Over.

Thank you very much, Owen. I think my yard could use some water.

That's very true. I've forgotten exactly how many days it did go, Buzz, but something like 30 days without rain; and we can aprreciate the rain we're getting right now.



That was Neil. This is Buzz, here. I wish we could find out when the last time my lawn was cut. Over.

That might be a little more difficult to find out. I'm not sure whether the - whether Mike is ready to admit when he last did the job, but I'll look into that for you.

Well, he'll tell you. He's got a new mower.

Roger.

Hey, ask my chinch bugs how they're toing?

Well, I'm not sure about your's. I can let you know about my own, and the report isn't very good.

11, Houston. Over.

Go ahead.

Roger. Joan wasn't home right now, Buzz, but Janis reports the grass is getting pretty high, and I would estimate that it's going to be close to your knees by the time you get out of quarantine. Over.

Okay. I'll have to schedule a little discussion after I get back.

Roger. And no reports - no report from the chinch bugs there, Mike.

Well, they're sort of taciturn little fellows. They don't say much; they just chomp away.

Concur on that.

Which is about what we're doing up here.

We concur on that, too.

Breakfast was magnificent as usual. I had sliced peaches, sausage patties, two cups of coffee, and I forget all what else.



That does sound pretty good. As a matter of fact, I'm way overdue for a meal myself, here. I could use some of that.

Why don't you get Milt to give you 5 minutes off and grab a hamburger?

I suggested that awhile ago. He was pointing out about the weight problem here. We've got to keep the calories low, so I'd better stand by without it.

Houston, Apollo 11. We've been doing a little flight planning for Apollo 12 up here.

Roger. Go ahead.

We're trying to calculate how much spagetti and meatballs we can get on board for Al Bean.

I'm not sure the spacecraft will take that much extra weight. Have you made any estimates?

It'll be close.

11, Houston. The medics at the next console report that the shrew is one animal which can eat six times its own body weight every 24 hours. This may be a satisfactory base line for your spaghetti calculations on Al Bean. Over.

Okay. Thank you. That's in work.

Houston, Apollo 11. It was slightly colder in here last night than it has been on any previous night. Does EECOMM notice any change in his data or any explanation for that?

Roger. Stand by just a moment. We've got to check some temperatures.

Up until last night it was - if anything, a little on the warm side at night. Last night it was on the chilly side.

Roger there. We'll run down the temperatures for the 2 nights.



Oh, it's no big thing. Just as a matter of interest.

Roger.

And how'd you like the command module RCS temperatures?

11, Houston. They all look very good. The lowest temperature was 40 degrees, and we're taking a look at your cabin temperatures now.

We agree on the CM RCS. No heaters are going 2 to be required by a country mile.

We think that's correct.

We don't like those heaters, anyway, working off the direct coils.

Roger.

Peculiar thing, Owen, on the platform alignment is that when I really take my time and do a very slow, careful, precise job of marking. I'm getting about the same star angle difference as when I'm doing it in DTC and have to do a hurried rush job with relatively poor tracking. Star angle differences seem insensitive. It almost made me believe there's a very small bias there somewhere in the sextant.

Roger, 11. Perhaps the 3 degrees per second just isn't that much of a bother. Over.

Well, he's really trying to explain why he can't get all zeros.

I think Buzz is probably right. As a matter of fact, one time I made a mark which I thought was a little bit in error, but I tho thought, "Well heck. I'll go ahead and see how it works out anyway," and I got five zeros that time. And when I have thought everything was exactly precisely on, I have consistently been getting 0.01.



Roger. Apparently it pays to hurry.

I usually do.

The visibility through the telescope has been very poor. It's, I would say, even worse than the simulator is right now. It requires long periods of dark adaptation which most times are most inconvenient; so it's really a tremendous asset to keep the platform powered up at all times and to keep it tweaked within the capability of the sextant field of view.

Understand, Mike.

11, Houston. Checking your temperatures, it does look like the spacecraft may have cooled down perhaps 2 or 3 degrees in the last 24 hours, and that sounds to be consistent with your report on the comfort level there. Over.

Okay.

Is that a LM off phenomenon?

11, Houston. It looks like we'll have to think a little more about that, as to whether it's a LM off or some effect of being out of Lunar orbit. We don't know, so we'll have to puzzle before we can give a better answer.

Okay.

Well, if the systems guys have anything they want chased down, we'll be happy to give you any readings or reports or what have you.

Roger. We'll think about that and see if there aren't some other tests to be usefully performed here.

Okay.

11, Houston. I'll be turning things over to the Green CAP COMM at this time, and see you on the ground tomorrow.



Okay, Owen. I want to thank you and the whole Purple/Maroon group there for a good job helping Apollo 11.

Thank you, sir.

Thanks from us to all of you. It was really appreciated.

Great job, you guys.

Roger, out.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. Over.

Go ahead, Houston. Apollo 11.

11, this is Houston. With reference to your subjective evaluation that it felt cooler in side the spacecraft last night, we reported earlier that we did indeed see a drop of about 3 degrees over the previous night. Looking back, it appears the crew of Apollo 10 reported similar feelings during the translunar and transearth coast phases. We're wondering if you could give us any indication of the relative amounts of free or condensed water in the cabin last night and the night before from which we could infer humidity. Over.

Roger. That might be a little bit difficult to do. We'll take a look at the tunnel now. It does seem as though, between the dirt, we had a little bit more moisture in the tunnel. Of course, the LM hadn't been vented when we did translunar.

Roger. We were more curious about the relative amount of moisture between, say, last night and the night before, both of which would have the LM missing.

There's more moisture in the tunnel now than there has been at any previous time. Subjectively we have been unable to determine any change in - any buildup in humidity. There appears to be no moisture any other place in the spacecraft. For example, the windows are not fogging or - and various other cool spots around the spacecraft - all of them appear to be completely dry.



This is Houston. Roger. Thank you.

How are all the "Greens" today, Bruce?

Oh, the Greens are in good shape. The actual Green Team has been here for several hours. We're dogging the watch down here to position Ron for entry. Over.

Roger. Understand. Did Dave Reed get to explain the lunar ... at the press conference?

No, but your comments about Bill Shaffer and the explanations were quoted in the paper last night.

Oh, oh.

Do you want to say anything more while you're on the line?

He's right. He's absolutely right.

How's old White, Bruce? Did he ever let you go get a cup of coffee when we were over on the back side?

Oh, things have been going pretty smoothly down here. He's really not that hard to get along with.

Oh, he must be mellowing.

We've only got two of them back here right now.

He always used to make me sit at the console through the back side passes, just for training.

Well, the word we have here is - that was because whenever you came back, you had to be retrained.

Touch.

Houston, Apollo 11. Out of curiosity, on those 70 mm cameras, we figure we exposed around 300 in the LM and around a thousand in the command module; and both cameras - or all the 70 mm cameras worked just fine.

Okay. Very good. Thank you.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. Over.

Go ahead, Houston.

11, this is Houston. Do you all have "Change Lima" for your entry operations checklist dated July 23? Over.

Dated when?

July 23.

I'm not sure that we hung around long enough to pick that one up.

Okay. If you've got the entry operations checklist handy, then I'll pass it up to you. Over.

How can you make changes after lift off?

You sure you don't mean June?

Negative. It just came up today. Over.

So, you're the first to get to us. Go ahead.

Okay. On page 6 1 of the entry out checklist down toward the bottom after "MAIN DEPLOY pushbutton," we have three additional steps we'd like you to accomplish. The intent of this is to reduce the oxygen pressure in your manifold and to eliminate the oxygen bleed flow through the potable and waste water tanks during descent. Over.

Okay. We've got 6 1 out. Go ahead.

Okay. Down at the bottom, you've got "10,000 feet MAIN PARACHUTE DEPLOY, MAIN DEPLOY pushbutton, PUSH within 1 second." And after that step, we'd like you insert "SURGE TANK O2 valve, OFF; REPRESS PACKAGE valve, OFF; and DIRECT O2 valve, OPEN." Do you copy?

Okay. Down at the bottom, after "MAIN DEPLOY pushbutton, PUSH; SURGE TANK O2, OFF; and REPRESS PACKAGE VALVE, OFF, DIRECT O2, ON" Over.



Roger. And then down at the very botton of page 6 2 where you see "DIRECT O2, OFF VERIFY," delete that step completely. Over.

Roger.

And for record purposes, this will be "Change Lima." Over.

Okay. We've got it. How far open do you want this the DIRECT O2 valve to be opened at this point? I guess you want it - just leave it open from that point on?

Roger. It should go all the way open, and you can just leave it on from that point on. The intent is to completely depressurize the oxygen manifold. Over.

Roger. Copy.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. For your information the All Star game has just ended with the National League winning 9 to 3 over American. Over.

Roger. Thank you.

And I have a message here for Mike that says "All the chinch bugs are gone." Over.

Having done their job I guess.

Well, along with one tree, it turns out.

Yes. I heard about that. That was right before the flight.

Right. That big storm.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. Are you still up there? Over.

Yes, we are. But not quite so far as we were a while ago.

Roger. We concur. We just wanted to make sure that we had good COMM with you.

Okay.



For general information, 11, you are now 95,970 miles out from the Earth. Over.

Right in our own back yard.

Say again.

Right in our own back yard.

Roger that.

Trying to come down hill a little bit now. What's our velocity?

Your velocity is 5991 feet per second.

Thank you.

And you are indeed coming down hill.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. Over.

Go ahead, Houston.

Roger, 11. I've got a flight plan update for you to give you an optimum attitude for the Earth in the number 1 window and the Moon in number 5 window. Over.

Ready to copy.

Roger. Your attitude will be roll 12 degrees, pitch 270 degrees, yaw 0 degrees. High gain antenna angles, pitch plus 14, yaw 263. Over.

Roger. I copy. Roll 012, pitch 270, yaw 0. High gain antenna, pitch plus 14 and yaw 263.

Roger. And when coming out of PTC, you might be advised that your deadband has been collapsed, so follow the checklist items. Over.

Roger that.

11, this is Houston. We're receiving a black signal from you right now, but we are getting TV. Over.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. Over.

Go ahead.

From signal strength indications, it appears that we may be locked up on a side lobe with a high gain antenna. We'd like you to go into wide bandwidth for about 15 seconds and then back to narrow. Over.

All right.

You have good S band signal strength now, Houston?

That's affirmative, 11.

You all set for TV?

Roger. We're all set whenever you're ready to send.



Okay.

Okay. You're coming through loud and clear now, 11, with your patch.

Good evening. This is the Commander of Apollo 11. A hundred years ago, Jules Verne wrote a book about a voyage to the Moon. His spaceship, Columbia, took off from Florida and landed in the Pacific Ocean after completing a trip to the Moon. It seems appropriate to us to share with you some of the reflections of the crew as the modern day Columbia completes its rendezvous with the planet Earth and the same Pacific Ocean tomorrow. First, Mike Collins.

11, this is Houston. We have an LOS here.

We'll be right back with you.

Roger.

In the interim, you may be interested in knowing that Jan and the children and Pat and the youngsters and Andy Aldrin are down here in the viewing room watching this evening.

We're glad to hear that.

Okay, 11. You're back on, with Mike in the middle of the screen there.

Roger. This trip of ours to the Moon may have looked, to you, simple or easy. I'd like to assure you that has not been the case. The Saturn V rocket which put us into orbit is an incredibly complicated piece of machinery, every piece of which worked flawlessly. This computer up above my head has a 38,000 word vocabulary, each word of which has been very carefullly chosen to be of the utmost value to us, the crew. This switch which I have in my hand now, has over 300 counterparts in the command module alone, this one single switch design. In addition to that, there are myriads of circuit breakers, levers, rods, and other associated controls. The SPS engine, our large rocket engine on the aft end of our service module, must have performed flawlessly, or we would have been stranded in lunar orbit. The parachutes up above my head must work perfectly tomorrow or we will plummet into the



ocean. We have always had confidence that all this equipment will work, and work properly, and we continue to have confidence that it will do so for the remainder of the flight. All this is possible only through the blood, sweat, and tears of a number of people. First, the American workmen who put these pieces of machinery together in the factory. Second, the painstaking work done by the various test teams during the assembly and retest after assembly. And finally, the people at the Manned Spacecraft Center, both in management, in mission planning, in flight control, and last, but not least, in crew training. This operation is somewhat like the periscope of a submarine. All you see is the three of us, but beneath the surface are thousands and thousands of others, and to all those, I would like to say, thank you very much.

11, this is Houston. We're getting a good picture of Buzz now, but no voice modulation. And would you open up the f stop on the TV camera; try 22, please?

That appears to be a lot better now. We're still not receiving Buzz's audio.

Good evening. I'd like to discuss with you a few of the more symbolic aspects of the flight of our mission, Apollo 11. As we've been discussing the events that have taken place in the past 2 or 3 days here on board our spacecraft, we've come to the conclusion that this has been far more than three men on a voyage to the Moon; more, still, than the efforts of a government and industry team; more, even, than the efforts of one nation. We feel that this stands as a symbol of the insatiable curiosity of all mankind to explore the unknown. Neil's statement the other day upon first setting foot on the surface of the Moon, "This is a small step for a man, but a great leap for mankind," I believe sums up these feelings very nicely. We accepted the challenge of going to the Moon; the acceptance of this challenge was inevitable. The relative ease with which we carried out our mission, I believe, is a tribute to the timeliness of that acceptance. Today, I feel we're fully capable of accepting expanded roles in the exploration of space. In retrospect, we have all been particularly pleased with the call signs that we very laboriously



chose for our spacecraft, Columbia and Eagle. We've been particularly pleased with the emblem of our flight, depicting the U.S. eagle bringing the universal symbol of peace from the Earth, from the planet Earth to the Moon; that symbol being the olive branch. It was our overall crew choice to deposit a replica of this symbol on the Moon. Personally, in reflecting on the events of the past several days, a verse from Psalms comes to mind to me. "When I consider the heavens, the work of Thy fingers, the moon and the stars which Thou hast ordained, what is man that Thou art mindful of him."

The responsibility for this flight lies first with history and with the giants of science who have preceded this effort; next with the American people, who have through their will, indicated their desire; next, to four administrations, and their Congresses, for implementing that will; and then, to the agency and industry teams that built our spacecraft, the Saturn, the Columbia, the Eagle, and the little EMU, the space suit and backpack that was our small spacecraft out on the lunar surface. We would like to give a special thanks to all those Americans who built the spacecraft, who did the construction, design, the tests, and put their - their hearts and all their abilities into those crafts. To those people, tonight, we give a special thank you, and to all the other people that are listening and watching tonight, God bless you. Good night from Apollo 11.

11, this is Houston. We're getting a zoom view out the window now.

Apollo 11, signing off.

Houston, Apollo 11. Do you want to crank up PTC again; do you have some reason to hold its attitude, or what's your pleasure?

You can crank up PTC again, Mike, any time you like. And I might add I thought that was a mighty fine TV presentation. There's certainly nothing I can add to it from down here.

Thank you.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. Over.



Go ahead.

Okay, 11. I've got a few small items here: one flight plan update and some entry photography information, if you are ready to copy. Over.

Go ahead.

Roger. At 180 hours 50 minutes GET, we should like to delete your oxygen fuel cell purge.

Okay.

And on the entry photography, if you are going to use a fresh magazine of color interior film, we recommend the following exposure settings: f11 at 1/250, six frames per second, focus on 7 feet for the fireball; f2.0, 1/60 of a second, six frames per second, focus on 50 feet when the chutes open. If you are using a magazine, part of which has already been used for interior shots, we recommend f16 at 1/500 of a second, six frames per second, focus on 7 feet for the fireball; f2.8, 1/60 of a second, six frames per second, focus on 50 feet when the parachutes open. And we would like to know the magazine number that you are intending to use if you have a chance. Over.

Okay. I think we got those. We will be using a fresh one and it will be color interior. Over.

Roger. When you get - get it out, we would like to have the number of the magazine and the letter of the magazine relayed down.

Okay. And we're thinking that we might want to run some of that at 12 frames per second. And I think we can get everything from 0.5 - 0.5g down; that will only give us about 7.8 minutes and ... frames ... double that. I guess maybe just an occasional burst to 12 frames would be what we want and the rest of it at six. Over.

This is Houston. That plan sounds fine with us, Neil.

Okay.

And lastly, we would like to know if your stowage configuration for entry is going to conform to



the nominal. The RETRO's down here are anxious to get an accurate c.g. computed for you, and in particular, where the LEVVA's are being stowed. Over.

Okay. We think we are going to put the LEVVA's and helmets in the hatch bag, and we'll let you know any other nonstandard stowage locations that we complete this evening.

This is Houston. Roger. Out.

Houston, Apollo 11.

Go ahead, 11.

Roger. The magazine we'll be using for entry tomorrow is magazine M. Over.

Roger. Understand. Magazine M as in Mike.

That's right.

Thank you. Out.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. Your friendly Green Team going off for the night, and going off for the last time. We wish to bid you a good night and Godspeed.

Thank you. We appreciate all that fine work done by the Green Team, and we'll be thanking you in person when we get back.

Roger. We'll see you on the ground.

Really enjoyed working with all of you. Thanks very much. Over.

Roger.

As usual, all you Greenies.

They're all smiles down here, even the trench.

Houston, Apollo 11.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. Over.

Roger. How's our thruster firing activity? We're about ready to crank up PTC if you are.

Roger. Go ahead.

Okay. Thank you.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. Over.

Go ahead, Houston.

11, we'd like you to shift to an OMNI antenna configuration at the present time. We're requesting the S band antenna OMNI switch to Bravo and the S band antenna OMNI switch to OMNI. The high gain antenna track in MANUAL. Pitch minus 50, yaw 270. Over.

Roger. I'll do that right now.

Roger. And if Mike has a minute, we'd like to do a little bit of troubleshooting. It seems he's either flat chested or something because we've lost respiration rate on the BIOMED telemetry. That is, the ZPN trace down here is flat.



He was shaving a little bit ago. He might have just let it slip. Hold on a moment.

All the blasted wires are all connected, is all I know.

Okay, Mike. We had a request that you disconnect the yellow connector from the signal conditioner and verify that it looks okay, reconnect it and then, if you would, check the two electrodes that are placed one on each side of your lower rib cage. Over.

I bet you there's a smile on Charlesworth's face.

Cliff is not on right now. Gene Kranz just relieved him a few minutes ago.

Roger that.

All those wires and things look normal up here.

Roger, Mike. We could see variations on our traces. You've connected and disconnected, but the medics still don't have a signal.

Looks like you're sending us a message of some sort.

Well, I promise to let you know if I stop breathing.

Apollo 11, Apollo 11, this is Houston broadcasting in the blind. Request OMNI Bravo. Request OMNI Bravo. Over.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. Communication reestablished.

SC
Apollo 11, this is Houston. Will you confirm you're in OMNI Bravo? Over.

Okay. That ought to give it to you.

Roger. Out.



Apollo 11, this is Houston. Mike, we're still getting a flat trace on you for the impedance pneumograph. Before you turn in this evening, you might try putting some fresh paste in the sensors, and if that doesn't work, the medics have agreed to forget about it. Over.

Mike's off the loop right now. I'll convey that message.

Okay. Thank you.

Houston, Apollo 11. Say again.

Roger, Mike. The trace on your respiration rate is still flat. If you have time this evening before turning in, we would suggest that you try putting some fresh paste in the two electrodes that go on the side of your lower rib cage; and if that doesn't work, just give up on it.

SC
(Sound of Train)

Hey, 11, this is Houston. You might tell Buzz not to exercise quite so strenuously. Over.

What's the problem?

Say again.

What's the problem?

Okay. That's one - that's one on us. (Laughter)

11, Houston. Seriously, that comment was just aimed at your musical selection.

Okay.

SC
(Sound of train)

Come on Neil, not so fast.

SC
(Sound of train)

You have an ergometer up here.

What was that? Real time exercise?

Just trying to be your ergometer.

Roger.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. Over.

Go ahead, Houston.

We'd like to know what your plans are as far as turning in this evening. Our - in the flight plan we show you commencing a rest period at about 182 hours, and what are you planning to do on that? We're going to be watching the weather here, and we expect to have an update on the weather, I guess, in about half hour or 45 minutes to pass to you. Over.

We're going to probably stick with the flight plan pretty much. We are going to - if - check the lights in the northwest corner of the U.S.



and southwest corner of Canada. If we can see up that high into the northern hemisphere. Other than that, we'll be on the flight plan.

Roger. For your information, the laser from McDonald Observatory in West Texas will be up from about 181 hours and 30 minutes, on for 1 hour. You should be able to spot the earth out of the number 1 window every time you pass roll 357 degrees and then, of course, you're in West Texas. Over.

Okay. Thank you.

How about the number 5 window?

Stand by a minute.

Roger. For the number 5 window. That'll be - every time you pass 230 degrees in roll. Over.

Beautiful. Thank you.

You guys are on your toes down there.

Roger.

You have a new, new star chart. You must have a new, new star chart. Huh?

Oh, we got a fresh, fresh FAO here.

Houston, Apollo 11. How much longer do you want us to keep charging battery B?

11, this is Houston. Nominally we're looking for about another hour and a half, but what we'd like to do is continue charging until shortly before you turn in for the night. Over.

That'll be fine. Are you going to want to charge A again at all?

Negative, 11.

Okay.

11, this is Houston. At about 180 45, we'll be handing over from Goldstone to Honeysuckle, and I'm handing over to Charlie. See you when you get back. Over.



Okay, Bruce. Good night. Thank you.

Roger. Good night.

Thank you very much, Bruce. It's been a pleasute working with you.

Have a nice trip down.

Houston, Apollo 11. Over.

Apollo 11, Houston. Go ahead.

Roger, Houston. For RETRO, I have the anticipated location of all the entry stowage, and I suggest you pull out the entry checklist, and we'll go through those maps in the front of it.

Apollo 11, Houston. Could you stand by just a few minutes? Charlie and Flight are out getting a weather briefing. They'll be back shortly.

Is this Ken?

Say again?

Is this Owen?

No, this is Chuck Lewis. Charlie Duke is out with Flight getting a weather briefing right now.

Okay. They're out drinking coffee. I know.

(Laughter) They'll be back momentarily.

Hello, Apollo 11. Houston. Over.

Roger, Houston. Apollo 11. Did you get the word on the entry checklist?

Roger, Mike. We sure did. We're ready to talk about it, if you are. Over.

I think the quickest thing is to go through page by page, the first part of the entry checklist where it has a map. Starting on the page with compartment L2 and L3. Are you with me?

Roger. With you.

Okay. L2 is as shown. L3 is as shown; there is about half the food remaining in L3.

Roger.



Where it says - where it says "And note," the CMP PGA is located in the L shaped bag with the other two PGA's. The LM shield was jettisoned with the - Correction, the CMP's helmet shield was jettisoned with the LM, and his helmet and gloves, instead of being in the sleep restraint, are in the hatch bags.

Okay. Let's see now. Your PGA is in the L shaped bag with the other two PGA's, and your helmet and gloves are in the L shaped bag instead of the sleep restraint.

The helmet and gloves are in the hatch bag, the great big bag that's underneath the left hand couch that you put the hatch in.

Roger. I thought I - That's what I copied. Okay. Go ahead.

Okay. The next page is identical except a nitpicking point: out R1 we got the entry checklist. Other than that it is identical, and the third page has got some changes.

Go ahead.

In A1 - Are you with me? I'm over there in compartment A1, now.

Go ahead, Mike. Over.

In compartment A1, the 16 millimeter magazine will be located in window number 4 instead of 5. Tissue dispensers; there is only one of them left. And compartment U3, the 16 millimeter bracket is on window 4, and the PGA bag - add the CMP's PGA, plus add two LCG's. And compartment A8 delete two LCG's, add one PPK, making a total of four, and add 10 pounds of LM miscellaneous equipment. We told you five the other day. We think ten is probably closer. Over.

Copy.

And that's all the changes on that page. Ready for the next page?

Roger. Go ahead, Mike.



On your next page, in compartment B1, we estimate about 15 percent of that food is remaining. In B2 we took PPK out of there and put trash in it. In B3, the 16 millimeter cable, the 18 millimeter lens, and the right angle mirror are on window number 4. And that there brings you all up to date.

Roger. How about the LEVVA's, Mike? Where did you put those? Over.

They're in the hatch bag.

Roger. Stand by. Our only concern, 11, is with the stuff you got in the hatch bag. That's pretty big bulk between you and A8, and we'd like to talk about moving that over to the sleep restraint. If you will stand by. I'll verify that. Over.

Okay.

11, Houston. Our recommendation on the gear you got in the helmet bag - correction, hatch bag, would be to remove that stuff and put it in the sleep restraint under the right couch. The reason is that the hatch bag straps are only configured for zero g, and it is a pretty difficult job getting it lashed down. With the gear in the sleep restraint, it's a pretty standard lash down procedure, and you could also use the Beta cord that you have on hoard. You concur? Over.

Yes. We'll look at it, Charlie, and let you know.

Roger. And I got a couple of other things, Mike. We need to terminate battery B charge at this time, and also, the weather is clobbering in at our targeted landing point due to scattered thunderstorms. We don't want to tangle with one of those, so we are going to move the - your aim point uprange. Correction, it will be downrange, to target for 1500 nautical mile entry so we can guarantee uplift control. The new coordinates are 13 degrees, 19 minutes north, 169 10 minutes west. The weather in that area is super. We got 2000 scattered, 8000 scattered with 10 miles visibility and 6 foot seas and the Hornet is sitting in great position to get to that targeted positton. Over.



Roger.

Apollo 11, Houston. Some of the general last minute updates here. On the entry, we had told you on the camera to set it at 50 feet. It turns out the biggest number on the camera is 25 feet, so just set it at infinity. Over.

Roger. Infinity.

Hello, Apollo 11. Houston. We're ready to put you to bed and say good night, if you give us your crew status report and verify that you changed out the CO2 canister a moment ago. Over.

07 13 57 5        Stand by.

Okay, Charlie. Crew status report follows: CDR 11023, CMP 10025, LMP 09027. Canister change complete.

Roger. Thank you very much there.

All men okay.

Roger. Thank you. Could you give us an onboard readout, please, sir?

Stand by. Okay. BAT C 37, PYRO BAT A 37, BAT B 37, RCS A 51, B 63, C 62, D 58.

Roger. Copy. Thank you much.

Apollo 11, Houston. It's good night from the White Team for the last time. We'll be off when you wake up in the morning. It's been a pleasure working with you guys. It was a beautiful show from all three of you. We appreciate it very much, and we'll see you when you get out of the LRL. Over.

Okay, Charlie. Thanks to you and all the White Team for a great job down there all the way through. Thank you.

Outstanding.

... very much, Charlie. Thanks.



Thanks to you guys, too.

And, 11, Houston. Mike, you get your chance at landing tomorrow. No go around.

Roger. You're going to let me land closer to Hawaii, too, aren't you?

That's right, sir.

11, Houston. We got some word just a moment ago that the McDonald Observatory is - said they had picked up the spacecraft in their telescope. Over.

Outstanding. We have been looking for their laser but haven't had much luck yet.

Roger. We'll pass it on to them, Neil. Thank you.

REST PERIOD - NO COMMUNICATIONS

APOLLO 11 AIR-TO-GROUND VOICE TRANSCRIPTION


REST PERIOD - NO COMMUNICATIONS

APOLLO 11 AIR-TO-GROUND VOICE TRANSCRIPTION


REST PERIOD - NO COMMUNICATIONS

APOLLO 11 AIR-TO-GROUND VOICE TRANSCRIPTION


REST PERIOD - NO COMMUNICATIONS

APOLLO 11 AIR-TO-GROUND VOICE TRANSCRIPTION


Hello, Houston. Apollo 11.

Apollo 11, Houston. Go.

Roger. Good morning. What's the status on midcourse 7?

Roger. We were going to let you sleep in until about 190 hours. Midcourse 7 is not required.

Okay. Thank you.

Apollo 11. Good morning from Houston. Over.

Good morning, 11.

Roger. We saw you up stirring around, and we thought that you were probably eating your breakfast there. Just in general, we'll probably start coming up with the uplink of the state vectors and the target loads and what have you at about 190 50, somewhere in that area, and get you started to work.

Okay.

And in the meantime, while you're eating your breakfast there, I've got the Maroon Bugle all standing by here to give you the morning news.

Glad to hear it.

Okay. Apollo 11 remains the prime story with the world awaiting your landing today at about 11 49 a.m. Houston time. In Washington, House tax reformers have fashioned a provision which would make it impossible for wealthy individuals to avoid income tax entirely through tax free investments or special allowances. Under the proposal tentatively adopted by the House Ways and Means Committee, everyone would pay taxes on at least half of their income.

Hang on a minute.

Roger. Standing by.

Okay. Okay, Ron. We're ready to go again. Thank you.



Roger. Continuing with the Maroon Bugle. President Nixon surprised your wives with a phone call from San Francisco just before he boarded a plane to fly out to meet you. All of them were very touched by your television broadcast. Jan and Pat watched from Mission Control here. The launch of Intelsat from the Cape was postponed for the fourth time last night. The problem was said to be a malfunctioning nitrogen regulator in the second stage of Delta. A new attempt will be made to launch it tonight. The research submarine Ben Franklin, which is studying the Gulf Stream, set a record by drifting 24 hours from 10 to 100 feet above the ocean floor in 1300 feet of water off the Georgia coast. The mission is led by Jacques Picard. Wally Schirra has been elected to a 5 year term on the board of trustees of the Detroit Institute of Technology. He will serve on the Institute's development committee. Air Canada says it has accepted 2300 reservations for flights to the Moon in the past 5 days. It might be noted that more than 100 have been made by men for their mothers in law. And finally, it appears that rather than killing romantic songs about the Moon, you have inspired hundreds of song writers. Nashville, Tennessee, which probably houses the largest collection of recording companies and song publishers in the country, now reports it is being flooded by Moon songs. Some will make it. The song at the top of the best sellers list this week is, "In the year 2525." Morning Bugle. Out.

Thank you very much, Ron.

Houston, crew status report: 5.5 7 5.5.

Apollo 11, Houston. Roger. We copy. And I have your consumables update, if you're ready to copy.

07 22 32 00 Go ahead.

Roger. GET 189 plus 00: RCS total minus 1 percent; Alfa minus 11; Bravo plus 10; Charlie minus 1; Delta minus 1; H2 total minus 0.76 pounds; oxygen total plus 17.6 pounds. Over.

Okay. It doesn't look like we're going to be able to get quite back on the flight plan.

Not quite; just about though.

Apollo 11, Houston. Request P00 and ACCEPT, and we'll send your REFSMMAT, state vector, and entry target load. Over.

You have it.

Roger. It'll be coming up.

Apollo 11, Houston. Can you tell us where the visor assemblies ended up, there?

We're going to follow your suggestion and stow them under right hand couch.

Roger. Mighty fine. Break. The weather forecast in the landing area right now is 2000 scattered, high scattered, 10 miles. The wind about 080 at 18 knots. You'll have about 3- to 6 foot waves. Your Delta H is plus 10 feet. And it looks like you'll be landing about 10 minutes before sunrise. Over.

Okay. Sounds good.

Roger.

Apollo 11, Houston. All three loads are in. The computer is yours. Over.

Roger.

And Mike, if you're on loop there, to extend the range and the constant g reentry, here, I've got a little procedure, if you would like to listen to it.

Stand by one.

Roger.

I'm right in the middle of my orange juice. Be with you in about 5 minutes.

Sure, no problem, standing by.

Houston, Apollo 11. Hey, Ron, I wonder if you could give us a good Navy explanation for this Delta H time. Over.



Roger. Let me think about it, and I'll come back.

You too, huh?

(Laughter) Right.

Collins has got one, but I'm not sure I buy it.

Apollo 11, Houston.

Go ahead.

Roger, 11. We don't have to worry about it any more. The altimeter out there is now standard, 29.92; but basically what it means is that if I give you a plus 10 feet, for instance, that means that you will hit the water with the ailtimeter reading 10 feet. Over.

All right.

Ah, Collins was wrong.

Apollo 11, Houston. I have your entry PAD. Over.

Stand by.

Roger. Standing by.

Okay, I'm ready to copy.

Roger. Entry PAD: area is the mid Pacific, roll 000, 152, 001, GET 194 46 06, 267, latitude plus 1332, minus 16917, 064, 36194, 649, range to go 14045, 36275, 195 03 06, 00 28, DL max 154, 084, 22400, 18000, D0 400, 02 13, 00 17, 03 51, 09 02, sextant star 45 0189, 277, boresight star, none available, lift vector up. Comments: GDC align, Vega and Deneb, roll 078, pitch 223, yaw 340. Additional comments: Use nonexit EMS pattern, EI minus 30, horizon check GET 194 33 06. Pitch 298. You'll get P65, but no P66. Additional note: Initial bank angle in P67 may not be full lift. Apollo 11, Houston. Read back.

Okay, Ron, For MIDPAC: 000, 152, 001, 194, 46 06, 267, plus 1332, minus 16917, 064, 36194, 649, 14045, 36275, 195 03 06, 0028, 154, 084,



2240, 180, 400, 02 13, 00 17, 03 51, 09 02, 45, 0189, 277, none available, lift vector up, GDC align, Vega and Deneb, roll 078, pitch 223, yaw 340. Use nonexit EMS. EI minus 30, horizon check 194 33 06, pitch 298. Initial bank angle in P67 may not be full lift, and we will get P65 but no P66.

Apollo 11, Houston. Roger. On your GDC align pitch, it should be 233, 233 in the pitch. Over.

Okay. I've got a 233.

Also your DL and MAX and MIN, I'm sure. are 22 400 and 18 000. Over.

Yes. That's right.

Okay. If you'll dig out your entry checklist there on page E6 1, I'll update your RETRO times there for the various altitudes. Over.

Okay. Go ahead.

Okay. On page E6 1, your RRT is 07 20, your 50K is 08 16; 40K is 08 30; your 24K is 09 02; and your 10K is 09 51. 0wer.

Okay. RRT, 07 20, 50 000, 08 16. That's - 07 20 is - is the time of steam pressure peg from RRT; and 40 000, 08 30; 24 000, 09 02; 10 000, 09 51.

11, Houston. You started out right, and then the numbers you read back were correct; but I didn't get your comment in between there.

I assume that - all I wanted to know is that first time, 07 20, that's the time of steam pressure peg. Right?

That's affirmative.

Okay.

Houston, Apollo 11. Ron, I'm ready to copy your message about the constant drag level.



Okay, Mike. Of course, this is in the event the G&amp;N and the EMS quits and you have to fly the constant g; and what we're trying to do is extend the constant g range from 1100 to 1500 miles. We've run this procedure in the simulator, and it works fine. Basically, I'll go through it - just go through it, and then if you have any questions come back. But it's the same lift vector up until MAX g, and then lift vector down, and then modulate the lift vector until g dot goes to zero. Okay. This procedure is essentially the same so far. And then hold g dot zero until you pass the RETRO elapsed time of V circular; and then after you pass this RETRO elapsed time of V circular, roll to a gimbal angle of 45 degrees, and then hold this constant bank angle of 45 degrees until you come to the RETRO elapsed time of drogues. Over.

Okay. It sounds straightforward enough. Understand constant g backup backup procedure, lift vector up until MAX g and then lift vector down; then modulate until bank angle until g dot equals zero. Maintain g dot equals zero until subcircular, then roll 45 degrees and hold until drogue time. Over.

Okay. That's mighty fine, Mike. That's correct.

This entry time line is my kind of time line. Nice and slow.

Okay, 11. Houston. Roger. It sure is. EECOMM is anxiously awaiting his big moment here for the logic sequence check whenever you're ready.

Okay. We'll be ready for that in just a flash.

Roger.

Apollo 11, Houston.

Go ahead, Ron.

This is Jim, Mike. Backup crew is still standing by. I just want to remind you that the most difficult part of your mission is going to be after recovery.

Well, we're looking forward to all parts of it.

Please don't sneeze.

Keep the mice healthy.

The Earth is really getting bigger up here and, of course, we see a crescent.

Yes.

We've been taking pictures and we have four exposures to go, and we'll take those and then pack the camera.

Houston, Apollo 11. We're ready for the logic check whenever you are. We're standing by to arm the logic. We've got ELS logic on, ELS AUTO, and all the circuit breakers in.

Apollo 11, Houston. Roger. You can press on with the SECS logic.

Okay. Logic 1 coming on.

MARK it.

Logic 2 coming on.



MARK it.

Apollo 11, Houston. Logic checks good. You're GO for PYRO ARM.

Thank you, sir.

Houston, Apollo 11 has got VHF A Simplex on whenever you want to make a COMM check.

Apollo 11, Houston. Roger. You faded out a little bit there, Buzz. I understand you have the VHF Simplex A on now. Is that correct? Over.

That affirmative. VHF Simplex A and we're TR on VHF.

Roger. Mighty fine. We'll watch it as you are coming on in and let you know when the intelligibility is up. We'll make a voice check with you at that time.

Houston, Apollo 11. I've been holding here in SCS control MINIMUM DEADBAND RATE LOW with the limit cycle on, just as a matter of curiosity, if you guys wanted some fuel numbers from that.

11, Houston. Roger. We copy and we've been figuring it out.

Okay.

It's a pleasure to be able to waste gas.

Roger. That's affirmative.

Apollo 11, Houston with a little recovery force information. Over.

Go ahead.

Roger. The Hornet is on station just far enough off the target point to keep from getting hit. Recovery 1, or the chopper, is there; they're on station. And Hawaii Rescue 1 and 2, the C 130's, are within 40 minutes of your target point. Over.



Sounds good. Thank you.

Apollo 11, Houston.

Go ahead.

Roger. Just to get a little downlink here to check out our VHF: I show us about an hour and 37 minutes, approximately, from entry interface. Over.

Okay. That's about right.

Okay. Looks like we're together on that, and I guess we're standing by for you to whip into the entry attitude.

Okay. We've just been taking a couple of last minute pictures. We've finished the EMS entry check, primary water EVAP activation.

Roger. Mighty fine.

Apollo 11, Houston.

Go ahead.

Roger, Mike. We recommend the left VHF antenna for VHF.

And this is your friendly backup CMP. Have a good trip, and may - remember to come in BEF.

You better believe. Thank you kindly.

We can see the Moon passing by the window and it looks what I considered to be a correct size.

Houston, Apollo 11. Like to switch to S band OMNI C. I just did a minute ago, and noticed a loss of signal strength, over.

Roger, Apollo 11. Go ahead and try it again now that you're in attitude.

Roger. Going OMNI C.

Apollo 11, Houston.



Apollo 11, Houston. Recommend antenna Bravo. Over.

Apollo 11, Houston. Recomend antenna Bravo, or at least a better one. Over.

Apollo 11, Houston.

Go ahead, Ron.

Roger. Faces are red here. We lost data with you there for a while. Did you do the P52? Over.

That's affirmative, we completed the P52. We'll give you the data from it in just a second. We passed our sextant star check at entry attitude, and right now we're maneuvering to our first horizon cheek pitch attitude of 298 degrees.

Roger. Copy that, 11.

Apollo 11, Houston. About 4 minutes to 1 hour, and I'll give you a mark at 1 hour. Was a command module preheat necessary? Over.

Negative that.

Roger. Copy. Negative command module preheat.

Apollo 11, Houston.

Go ahead.

Roger. We don't want to jettison the hydrogen tank that stratified, so could you cycle the fans in tank 2 please? Hydrogen tank 2.

You better believe, that old service module has taken good care of us. We want to take good care of it.

It sure has, hasn't it.

It's been a champ.

11, Houston. I'll give you a time hack at 58 minutes to go. It's about 15 seconds yet.

Thank you.

Stand by.

MARK.

58 minutes.

Roger.

Apollo 11, Houston.

Go ahead, Houston. Apollo 11.

Roger. We have our update at the state vector out there for you. Request P00 and ACCEPT. Over.

Okay. You've got it.

Okay. Here it comes.



Apollo 11, Houston.

Go ahead.

Roger. The computer is yours now. Looks like you're in VHF range, here. So we'll try a VHF check for you. We'll just send VHF up to you. Stand by.

Okay.

Apollo 11, Houston. VHF check on Simplex Alfa. Over.

Roger, Houston. Apollo 11, VHF Simplex Alfa, loud and clear. How me? Over.

Roger, 11. Houston. You're loud. The standard VHF noise, though, makes you realize that S band is good.

Roger. Understand. Thank you.

Apollo 11, Houston. Backup S band now, and we're standing by for command module RCS aetivation.

Okay. We're just about there.

Apollo 11, Houston, you're GO for PYRO ARM.

Thank you, Houston.

Apollo 11, Houston. Your command module pressurization looks mighty fine to us.

Looks good here, Ron.

And 11, Houston, I've got an update for about four items on your entry PAD.

Ready to copy.

Roger. Your MAX g, 063; your NOUN 60, your Gamma, at 400K, 648; your range to go on the EMS, 14033; and your RETRO time for V circular, 02 14. Over.

Roger. Copy MAX g 6.3; R2 at NOUN 60, 6.48; range to go, EMS, 14033; RET V circular, 02 14. Over.



Roger. Readback is correct there.

Houston, Apollo 11.

Apollo 11, Houston. GO.

Roger. The first horizon check 194 23 06 at a pitch angle of 298 does not quite fall on the 31 7 line. It's just a little high. It's within 5 degrees tolerance.

Apollo 11, Houston. The horizon check there was supposed to be at 33. Over.

Okay. That's fine, sir. Thank you.

Roger.

Apollo 11, Houston. Command module RCS looks fine to us.

Same here, Ron. Looks very good. Doesn't make as much noise as we thought. Some of them are barely audible.

Roger.

And 11, Houston. Weather still holding real fine in the recovery area.

Roger.

Looks like it's about 1500 scattered, high scattered. And it's still 3  to 6 foot waves.

Hey, that part of it sounds good.

Roger.

11, Houston, I'll give you another Mark at 33 minutes. Stand by.

MARK.

Roger that.

Houston, Apollo 11. Do you have any recommended settings to catch the sunset. Over.

Roger. Well, the time is 36 41. And stand by for some settings.



Okay. I'll probably only be doing it maybe - part of it at six frames a second, some it at one. So I could be changing settings as it goes through.

Roger. Copy.

And the horizon check passes; it's right on the money.

Hey, mighty fine. Sounds good.

Apollo 11, Houston. On the shooting at the Sun, f:16th at 1 over 250.

Understand f:16 at 1 over 250.

Roger.

And the Sun is going down on schedule. It's getting real dark in here.

Apollo 11. Houston. Copy.

Apollo 11, Houston. We see you getting ready for SEP. Everything looks mighty fine down here.

Same here, Ron. Thank you.

Apollo 11, Houston. You're still looking mighty fine from here. You're cleared for landing.

We appreciate that, Ron. Thank you.

Roger. Gears down and locked.

Roger.

Thank you.

Houston, we got the service module going by. A little high and a little bit to the right.

Roger. Thank you.

And it's rotating just like it should be. Thrusters are firing.

Good. It's got a lot of gas there to burn out, too.



It's coming across now from right to left.

Houston. Roger.

Houston, Apollo 11. You going to turn on the tape recorder shortly?

11, Houston. You can go ahead and turn it on.

Okay. I'll have to go to command reset to do that.

08 02 57 34 11, Houston. That's negative. All you have to do is turn it on. That'll be fine.

I guess I don't know how to turn it on, then. I got PCM, ANTILOG RECORD, FORWARD; high bit rate, and barber pole.

11, Houston. We'll send the ON command from down here, see if it works.

Okay.

Got our friend the Moon whipping by the field of view right now.

Roger. Copy.

11, Houston. We'll have you for about 3 or 4 minutes through Redstone and then pick you up after blackout through ARIA.

Roger.

Houston, Apollo 11. I'm going to go to COMMAND RESET and turn the tape on.

11, Houston. Recommend negative on that. That will put us in low bit rate.

0kay. I already put it to COMMAND RESET, but I still have barber pole on the tape. And now my switch is high bit rate.

Okay. That will be fine. On 225, there, if you can reach it, Buzz, the last two circuit breakers in the second row from the bottom, punch those in.



And 11, Houston, don't mess around with that 225 there.

Okay.

And 11, Houston. You're going over the hill there shortly. You're looking mighty fine to us.

See you later.

Apollo 11, Houston through ARIA.

Apollo 11, Houston through ARIA.

Apollo 11, Houston through ARIA 4.

Apollo 11, Houston through ARIA. Standing by. Over.

Apollo 11, Houston in the blind. AIR B0SS has visual contact.

Apollo 11, Houston. Standing by for your DSKY reading. Over.

Apollo 11, Houston. Stand by for your miss distance. Over.

Apollo 11, Houston. Standing by for your DSKY reading. Over.

DROGUES.

Apollo 11, Houston. Your DSKY reading, please. Over.

Roger. We were *** right on ... 169, 17.

Reading 1330, 1069, 15.

Apollo 11, Apollo 11. This is Hornet. Hornet. Over.

Hello, Hornet. This is Apollo 11 reading you loud and clear. Our position 1330, 16915.

11, Hornet. Copy 1330, 1675. Any further data? Over.

330, 169, 15.

Do you have an error?

We have that. And what is condition of the crew?

11, this is Hornet. What's your error of splashdown and condition of crew? Over.

The condition of crew *** 4000 - 3500 feet, on the way down.

11, this is Hornet. Copy. 11, Hornet. What's your splashdown error? Over.

SC
Okay. Our splashdown error is by latitude, longitude, 1330 16 *** 15. That's ***

Hornet. Roger, out.

Okay, Hornet. Apollo 11 is out.

RoRer. 2500 on chutes.

SWIM 1 has ... contact 150, holding ... 190.

Hornet. Roger. 0ut.

... bearing 200.

Apollo 11 at 1500 feet.

Hornet. Roger. Copy. Out.

Swim 1. Have a visual dead ahead about a mile?

Hornet. Roger.
... spacecraft.

Roger. This is SWIM 1, Apollo 11.

... 300 feet.

Roger. You're looking real good.

SPLASHDOWN!
